3         Definitions
For the purposes of this Recommendation | International Standard, the following definitions apply.
3.1       x, floor function: This indicates the largest integer not exceeding x.
3.2       x, ceiling function: This indicates the smallest integer not exceeded by x.
3.3       5-3 reversible filter: A particular filter pair used in the wavelet transformation. This reversible filter pair
has 5 taps in the low-pass and 3 taps in the high-pass.
3.4       9-7 irreversible filter: A particular filter pair used in the wavelet transformation. This irreversible filter pair
has 9 taps in the low-pass and 7 taps in the high-pass.
3.5       access unit: A coded representation of one video frame.
3.6       AND: Bit wise AND logical operator.
3.7       arithmetic coder: An entropy coder that converts variable length strings to variable length codes (encoding)
and vice versa (decoding).
3.8      auxiliary channel: A channel that is used by the application outside the scope of colourspace conversion. For
example, an opacity channel or a depth channel would be an auxiliary channel.
3.9       bit: A contraction of the term "binary digit"; a unit of information represented by a zero or a one.
3.10       bit-plane: A two dimensional array of bits. In this Recommendation | International Standard a bit-plane refers
to all the bits of the same magnitude in all coefficients or samples. This could refer to a bit-plane in a component,
tile-component, code-block, region of interest, or other.
3.11      bit stream: The actual sequence of bits resulting from the coding of a sequence of symbols. It does not include
the markers or marker segments in the main and tile-part headers or the EOC marker. It does include any packet headers
and in-stream markers and marker segments not found within the main or tile-part headers.
3.12      big-endian: The bits of a value representation occur in order from the most significant to the least significant.
3.13     box: A portion of the file format defined by a length and unique box type. Boxes of some types may contain
other boxes.
3.14      box contents: Refers to the data wrapped within the box structure. The contents of a particular box are stored
within the DBox field within the box data structure.
3.15      box type: Specifies the kind of information that shall be stored with the box. The type of a particular box is
stored within the TBox field within the box data structure.
3.16      byte: Eight bits.
3.17      channel: One logical component of the image. A channel may be a direct representation of one component from
the codestream, or may be generated by the application of a palette to a component from the codestream.




2             Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                  ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

3.18       cleanup pass: A coding pass performed on a single bit-plane of a code-block of coefficients. The first pass and
only coding pass for the first significant bit-plane is a cleanup pass; the third and the last pass of every remaining bit-plane
is a cleanup pass.
3.19      codestream: A collection of one or more bit streams and the main header, tile-part headers, and the EOC
required for their decoding and expansion into image data. This is the image data in a compressed form with all of the
signalling needed to decode.
3.20      code-block: A rectangular grouping of coefficients from the same sub-band of a tile-component.
3.21      code-block scan: The order in which the coefficients within a code-block are visited during a coding pass. The
code-block is processed in stripes, each consisting of four rows (or all remaining rows if less than four) and spanning the
width of the code-block. Each stripe is processed column by column from top to bottom and from left to right.
3.22      coder: An embodiment of either an encoding or decoding process.
3.23      coding pass: A complete pass through a code-block where the appropriate coefficient values and context are
applied. There are three types of coding passes: significance propagation pass, magnitude refinement pass and cleanup
pass. The result of each pass (after arithmetic coding, if selective arithmetic coding bypass is not used) is a stream of
compressed image data.
3.24      coefficient: The values that are the result of a transformation.
3.25     colour channel: A channel that functions as an input to a colour transformation system. For example, a red
channel or a greyscale channel would be a colour channel.
3.26       component: A two-dimensional array of samples. An image typically consists of several components, for
instance, representing red, green, and blue.
3.27      compressed image data: Part or all of a bit stream. It can also refer to a collection of bit streams in part or all
of a codestream.
3.28      conforming reader: An application that reads and interprets a JP2 file correctly.
3.29      context: Function of coefficients previously decoded and used to condition the decoding of the present
coefficient.
3.30     context label: The arbitrary index used to distinguish different context values. The labels are used as a
convenience of notation rather than being normative.
3.31      context vector: The binary vector consisting of the significance states of the coefficients included in a context.
3.32      decoder: An embodiment of a decoding process, and optionally a colour transformation process.
3.33      decoding process: A process which takes as its input all or part of a codestream and outputs all or part of a
reconstructed image.
3.34     decomposition level: A collection of wavelet sub-bands where each coefficient has the same spatial impact or
span with respect to the source component samples. These include the HL, LH, and HH sub-bands of the same two
dimensional sub-band decomposition. For the last decomposition level, the LL sub-band is also included.
3.35     delimiting markers and marker segments: Markers and marker segments that give information about
beginning and ending points of structures in the codestream.
3.36       discrete wavelet transformation (DWT): A transformation that iteratively transforms one signal into two or
more filtered and decimated signals corresponding to different frequency bands. This transformation operates on spatially
discrete samples.
3.37      encoder: An embodiment of an encoding process.
3.38      encoding process: A process that takes as its input all or part of the source image data and outputs a codestream.
3.39      file format: A codestream and additional support data and information not explicitly required for the decoding
of codestream. Examples of such support data include text fields providing titling, security and historical information,
data to support placement of multiple codestreams within a given data file, and data to support exchange between
platforms or conversion to other file formats.
3.40       fixed information markers and fixed information marker segments: Markers and marker segments that
offer information about the original image.
3.41     functional markers and functional marker segments: Markers and marker segments that offer information
about coding procedures.


                                                                                     Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)               3
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

3.42      grid resolution: The spatial resolution of the reference grid, specifying the distance between neighbouring
points on the reference grid.
3.43      guard bits: Additional most significant bits that have been added to sample data.
3.44       header: Either a part of the codestream that contains only markers and marker segments (main header and
tile-part header) or the signalling part of a packet (packet header).
3.45     HH sub-band: The sub-band obtained by forward horizontal high-pass filtering and vertical high-pass filtering.
This sub-band contributes to reconstruction with inverse vertical high-pass filtering and horizontal high-pass filtering.
3.46     HL sub-band: The sub-band obtained by forward horizontal high-pass filtering and vertical low-pass filtering.
This sub-band contributes to reconstruction with inverse vertical low-pass filtering and horizontal high-pass filtering.
3.47      image: The set of all components.
3.48      image area: A rectangular part of the reference grid, registered by offsets from the origin and the extent of the
reference grid.
3.49      image area offset: The number of reference grid points down and to the right of the reference grid origin where
the origin of the image area can be found.
3.50     image data: The components and component samples making up an image. Image data can refer to either the
source image data or the reconstructed image data.
3.51       in-bit-stream markers and in-bit-stream marker segments: Markers and marker segments that provide error
resilience functionality.
3.52       informational markers and informational marker segments: Markers and marker segments that offer
ancillary information.
3.53      instantaneous bit rate: For each frame, this corresponds to the size of the contiguous codestream for the frame
in bits multiplied by the frame rate.
3.54      irreversible: A transformation, progression, system, quantization, or other process that, due to a systemic or
quantization error, disallows lossless recovery. An irreversible process can only lead to lossy compression.
3.55      JP2 file: The name of a file in the file format described in this Recommendation | International Standard.
Structurally, a JP2 file is a contiguous sequence of boxes.
3.56      JPEG: Used to refer globally to the encoding and decoding process of the following Recommendations |
International Standards:
          –      Rec. ITU-T T.81 | ISO/IEC 10918-1;
          –      Rec. ITU-T T.83 | ISO/IEC 10918-2;
          –      Rec. ITU-T T.84 | ISO/IEC 10918-3;
          –      Rec. ITU-T T.86 | ISO/IEC 10918-4.
3.57      JPEG 2000: Used to refer globally to the encoding and decoding processes in this Recommendation |
International Standard and their embodiment in applications.
3.58     LH sub-band: The sub-band obtained by forward horizontal low-pass filtering and vertical high-pass filtering.
This sub-band contributes to reconstruction with inverse vertical high-pass filtering and horizontal low-pass filtering.
3.59     LL sub-band: The sub-band obtained by forward horizontal low-pass filtering and vertical low-pass filtering.
This sub-band contributes to reconstruction with inverse vertical low-pass filtering and horizontal low-pass filtering.
3.60     layer: A collection of compressed image data from coding passes of one or more code-blocks of a
tile-component. Layers have an order for encoding and decoding that must be preserved.
3.61      lossless: A descriptive term for the effect of the overall encoding and decoding processes in which the output
of the decoding process is identical to the input to the encoding process. Distortion-free restoration can be assured. All of
the coding processes or steps used for encoding and decoding are reversible.
3.62      lossy: A descriptive term for the effect of the overall encoding and decoding processes in which the output of
the decoding process is not identical to the input to the encoding process. There is distortion (measured mathematically).
At least one of the coding processes or steps used for encoding and decoding is irreversible.
3.63      magnitude refinement pass: A type of coding pass.




4             Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                               ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

3.64     main header: A group of markers and marker segments at the beginning of the codestream that describe the
image parameters and coding parameters that can apply to every tile and tile-component.
3.65     marker: A two-byte code in which the first byte is hexadecimal FF (0xFF) and the second byte is a value
between 1 (0x01) and hexadecimal FE (0xFE).
3.66      marker segment: A marker and associated (not empty) set of parameters.
3.67      mod: mod(y,x) = z, where z is such that 0  z  x, and such that y – z is a multiple of x.
3.68      packet: A part of the bit stream comprising a packet header and the compressed image data from one layer of
one precinct of one resolution level of one tile-component.
3.69      packet header: Portion of the packet that contains the signalling necessary for decoding that packet.
3.70       pointer markers and pointer marker segments: Markers and marker segments that offer information about
the location of structures in the codestream.
3.71       precinct: A one rectangular region of a transformed tile-component, within each resolution level, used for
limiting the size of packets.
3.72      precision: Number of bits allocated to a particular sample, coefficient or other binary numerical representation.
3.73      progression: The order of a codestream where the decoding of each successive bit contributes to a "better"
reconstruction of the image. What metrics make the reconstruction "better" is a function of the application. Some
examples of progression are increasing resolution or improved sample fidelity.
3.74      quantization: A method of reducing the precision of the individual coefficients to reduce the number of bits
used to entropy-code them. This is equivalent to division while compressing and multiplying while decompressing.
Quantization can be achieved by an explicit operation with a given quantization value or by dropping (truncating) coding
passes from the codestream.
3.75       raster order: A particular sequential order of data of any type within an array. The raster order starts with the
top left data point and moves to the immediate right data point, and so on, to the end of the row. After the end of the row
is reached the next data point in the sequence is the left-most data point immediately below the current row. This order is
continued to the end of the array.
3.76      reconstructed image: An image that is the output of a decoder.
3.77       reconstructed sample: A sample reconstructed by the decoder. This always equals the original sample value
in lossless coding but may differ from the original sample value in lossy coding.
3.78    reference grid: A regular rectangular array of points used as a reference for other rectangular arrays of data.
Examples include components and tiles.
3.79      reference tile: A rectangular sub-grid of any size associated with the reference grid.
3.80     region of interest (ROI): A collections of coefficients that are considered of particular relevance by some user-
defined measure.
3.81      resolution level: Equivalent to the decomposition level with one exception: the LL sub-band is also a separate
resolution level.
3.82      reversible: A transformation, progression, system or other process that does not suffer a systemic or
quantization error and therefore, allows lossless signal recovery.
3.83      sample: One element in the two-dimensional array that comprises a component.
3.84       segmentation symbol: A special symbol coded with a uniform context at the end of each coding pass for error
resilience.
3.85      selective arithmetic coding bypass: A coding style where some of the code-block passes are not coded by the
arithmetic coder. Instead the bits to be coded are appended directly to the bit stream without coding.
3.86      shift: Multiplication or division of a number by powers of two.
3.87      sign bit: A bit that indicates whether a number is positive (zero value) or negative (one value).
3.88      sign-magnitude notation: A binary representation of an integer where the distance from the origin is expressed
with a positive number and the direction from the origin (positive or negative) is expressed with a separate single sign bit.
3.89      significance propagation pass: A coding pass performed on a single bit-plane of a code-block of coefficients.



                                                                                   Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)              5
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

3.90       significance state: State of a coefficient at a particular bit-plane. If a coefficient, in sign-magnitude notation,
has the first magnitude 1 bit at or before the given bit-plane, it is considered "significant". If not, it is considered
"insignificant".
3.91      source image: An image used as input to an encoder.
3.92       sub-band: A group of transform coefficients resulting from the same sequence of low-pass and high-pass
filtering operations, both vertically and horizontally.
3.93      sub-band coefficient: A transform coefficient within a given sub-band.
3.94      sub-band decomposition: A transformation of an image tile-component into sub-bands.
3.95       superbox: A box that itself contains a contiguous sequence of boxes (and only a contiguous sequence of boxes).
As the JP2 file contains only a contiguous sequence of boxes, the JP2 file is itself considered a superbox. When used as
part of a relationship between two boxes, the term "superbox" refers to the box which directly contains the other box.
3.96      tile: A rectangular array of points on the reference grid, registered with and offset from the reference grid origin
and defined by a width and height. The tiles which overlap are used to define tile-components.
3.97      tile-component: All the samples of a given component in a tile.
3.98      tile index: The index of the current tile ranging from zero to the number of tiles minus one.
3.99      tile-part: A portion of the codestream with compressed image data for some, or all of a tile. The tile-part
includes at least one, and up to all of the packets that make up the coded tile.
3.100     tile-part header: A group of markers and marker segments at the beginning of each tile-part in the codestream
that describe the tile-part coding parameters.
3.101      tile-part index: The index of the current tile-part ranging from zero to the number of tile-parts minus one in a
given tile.
3.102     transformation: A mathematical mapping from one signal space to another.
3.103     transform coefficient: A value that is the result of a transformation.
3.104     XOR: Exclusive OR logical operator.


