5         General description
This Recommendation | International Standard describes an image compression system that allows great flexibility, not
only for the compression of images, but also for the access into the codestream. The codestream provides a number of
mechanisms for locating and extracting portions of the compressed image data for the purpose of retransmission, storage,
display or editing. This access allows storage and retrieval of compressed image data appropriate for a given application,
without decoding.
The division of both the original image data and the compressed image data in a number of ways leads to the ability to
extract image data from the compressed image data to form a reconstructed image with a lower resolution or lower
precision, or regions of the original image. This allows the matching of a codestream to the transmission channel, storage
device or display device, regardless of the size, number of components and sample precision of the original image. The
codestream can be manipulated without decoding to achieve a more efficient arrangement for a given application.
Thus, the sophisticated features of this Recommendation | International Standard allow a single codestream to be used
efficiently by a number of applications. The largest image source devices can provide a codestream that is easily processed
for the smallest image display device, for example.
In general, this Recommendation | International Standard deals with three domains: spatial (samples), transformed
(coefficients) and compressed image data. Some entities (e.g., tile-component) have meaning in all three domains. Other
entities (e.g., code-block or packet) have meaning in only one domain (e.g., transformed or compressed image data,
respectively). The splitting of an entity into other entities in the same domain (e.g., component to tile-components) is
described separately for each of the domains.

5.1       Purpose
There are four main elements described in this Recommendation | International Standard:
          –      Encoder: An embodiment of an encoding process. An encoder takes as input digital source image data and
                 parameter specifications, and by means of a set of procedures generates as output a codestream.
          –      Decoder: An embodiment of a decoding process. A decoder takes as input compressed image data and
                 parameter specifications, and by means of a specified set of procedures generates as output digital
                 reconstructed image data.
          –      Codestream syntax: A representation of the compressed image data that includes all parameter
                 specifications required by the decoding process.
          –      Optional file format: The optional file format is for exchange between application environments. The
                 codestream can be used by other file formats or stand-alone without this file format.

5.2       Codestream
The codestream is a linear stream of bits from the first bit to the last bit. For convenience, it can be divided into (8-bit)
bytes, starting with the first bit of the codestream, with the "earlier" bit in a byte viewed as the most significant bit of the
byte when given e.g., a hexadecimal representation. This byte stream may be divided into groups of consecutive bytes.
The hexadecimal value representation is sometimes implicitly assumed in the text when describing bytes or a group of
bytes that do not have a "natural" numeric value representation.




8             Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                             ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

5.3              Coding principles
The main procedures for this Recommendation | International Standard are shown in Figure 5-1. This shows the decoding
order only. The compressed image data is already conceptually assigned to portions of the image data. Procedures are
presented in the annexes in the order of the decoding process. The coding process is summarized below.
          NOTE 1 – Annexes A to I are considered normative to this Recommendation | International Standard. However, certain denoted
          subclauses and notes and all examples are informative.

Many images have multiple components. This Recommendation | International Standard has a multiple component
transformation to decorrelate three components. This is the only function in this Recommendation | International Standard
that relates components to each other (see Annex G).
The image components may be divided into tiles. These tile-components are rectangular arrays that relate to the same
portion of each of the components that make up the image. Thus, tiling of the image actually creates tile-components that
can be extracted or decoded independently of each other. This tile independence provides one of the methods for
extracting a region of the image (see Annex B).
The tile-components are decomposed into different decomposition levels using a wavelet transformation. These
decomposition levels contain a number of sub-bands populated with coefficients that describe the horizontal and vertical
spatial frequency characteristics of the original tile-components. The coefficients provide frequency information about a
local area, rather than across the entire image like the Fourier transformation. That is, a small number of coefficients
completely describe a single sample. A decomposition level is related to the next decomposition level by a spatial factor
of two. That is, each successive decomposition level of the sub-bands has approximately half the horizontal and half the
vertical resolution of the previous one. Images of lower resolution than the original are generated by decoding a selected
subset of these sub-bands (see Annex F).
Although there are as many coefficients as there are samples, the information content tends to be concentrated in just a
few coefficients. Through quantization, the information content of a large number of small-magnitude coefficients is
further reduced (Annex E). Additional processing by the entropy coder reduces the number of bits required to represent
these quantized coefficients, sometimes significantly compared to the original image (see Annexes C, D and B).

                                                          Codestream syntax (Annex A)




                                                                                                                                         Reconstructed and rendered image
                                                                            ROI
                                                                         (Annex H)



 Codestream
                                      Arithmetic          Coefficient                                                DC, comp.
                 Data ordering                                               Quantization      Transformation
                                        coding           bit modelling                                             transformation
                  (Annex B)                                                   (Annex E)          (Annex F)
                                      (Annex C)           (Annex D)                                                  (Annex G)



                                                          File format (optional, Annex I)
                                                                                                                         T.800_F5-1


                                                   Figure 5-1 – Specification block diagram
The individual sub-bands of a tile-component are further divided into code-blocks. These rectangular arrays of
coefficients can be extracted independently. The individual bit-planes of the coefficients in a code-block are coded with
three coding passes. Each of these coding passes collects contextual information about the bit-plane compressed image
data (see Annex D). An arithmetic coder uses this contextual information, and its internal state, to decode a compressed
bit stream (see Annex C.) Different termination mechanisms allow different levels of independent extraction of this coding
pass compressed image data.
The bit stream compressed image data created from these coding passes is grouped in layers. Layers are arbitrary
groupings of coding passes from code-blocks (see Annex B).
          NOTE 2 – Although there is great flexibility in layering, the premise is that each successive layer contributes to a higher quality
          image.

Sub-band coefficients at each resolution level are partitioned into rectangular areas called precincts (see Annex B).
Packets are a fundamental unit of the compressed codestream. A packet contains compressed image data from one layer
of a precinct of one resolution level of one tile-component. Packets provide another method for extracting a spatial region


                                                                                                Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)                                                  9
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

independently from the codestream. These packets are interleaved in the codestream using a few different methods
(see Annex B).
A mechanism is provided that allows the compressed image data corresponding to regions of interest in the original tile-
components to be coded and placed earlier in the bit stream (see Annex H).
Several mechanisms are provided to allow the detection and concealment of bit errors that might occur over a noisy
transmission channel (see D.5 and J.7).
The codestream relating to a tile organized in packets, are arranged in one or more tile-parts. A tile-part header, comprised
of a series of markers and marker segments, contains information about the various mechanisms and coding styles that
are needed to locate, extract, decode and reconstruct every tile-component. At the beginning of the entire codestream is a
main header, comprised of markers and marker segments that offers similar information, as well as information about the
original image (see Annex A).
The codestream is optionally wrapped in a file format that allows applications to interpret the meaning of, and other
information about the image. The file format may contain data besides the codestream (see Annex I).
In review, procedures that divide the original image are the following:
          –      The components of the image are divided into rectangular tiles. The tile-component is the basic unit of the
                 original or reconstructed image.
          –      Performing the wavelet transformation on a tile-component creates decomposition levels.
          –      These decomposition levels are made up of sub-bands of coefficients that describe the frequency
                 characteristics of local areas (rather than across the entire tile-component) of the tile-component.
          –      The sub-bands of coefficients are quantized and collected into rectangular arrays of code-blocks.
          –      Each bit-plane of the coefficients in a code-block is entropy coded in three types of coding passes.
          –      Some of the coefficients can be coded first to provide a region of interest.
At this point the image data is fully converted to compressed image data. The procedures that reassemble these bit stream
units into the codestream are the following:
          –      The compressed image data from the coding passes are collected in layers.
          –      Packets are composed compressed image data from one precinct of a single layer of a single resolution
                 level of a single tile-component. The packets are the basic unit of the compressed image data.
          –      All the packets from a tile are interleaved in one of several orders and placed in one or more tile-parts.
          –      The tile-parts have a descriptive tile-part header and can be interleaved in some orders.
          –      The codestream has a main header at the beginning that describes the original image and the various
                 decomposition and coding styles.
          –      The optional file format describes the meaning of the image and its components in the context of the
                 application.


