                                                          Annex H

                                    Coding of images with regions of interest
                    (This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation | International Standard.)


In this annex, the flow charts and tables are normative only in the sense that they are defining an output that alternative
implementations shall duplicate.
This annex describes the region of interest (ROI) technology. An ROI is a part of an image that is coded earlier in the
codestream than the rest of the image (the background). The coding is also done in such a way that the information
associated with the ROI precedes the information associated with the background. The method used (and described in
this annex) is the Maxshift method.

H.1       Decoding of ROI
The procedure specified in this clause is applied only in the case of the presence of an RGN marker segment (indicating
the presence of an ROI).
The procedure realigns the significant bits of ROI coefficients and background coefficients. It is defined using the
following steps:
          1)   Get the scaling value, s, from the SPrgn parameter of the RGN marker segment in the codestream
               (see A.6.3). The following steps (2, 3 and 4) are applied to each coefficient (u, v) of sub-band b.
          2)   If Nb(u, v) < Mb (see definition of Nb(u, v) in D.2.1 and of Mb in Equation (E-2)), then no modification
               takes place.
          3)   If Nb(u, v)  Mb and if at least one of the first Mb (see definition in E.1) MSBs (i = 1, ..., Mb) is non-zero,
               then the value of Nb(u, v) is updated as Nb(u, v) = Mb.
          4)   If Nb(u, v)  Mb and if all first Mb MSBs are equal to zero, then the following modifications are made:
               a)    discard the first s MSBs and shift the remaining MSBs s places, as described in Equation (H-1), for
                     i = 1, ..., Mb:

                                                      MSBi  s b, u, v  if i  s  Nb u, v 
                                   MSBi b, u, v                                                                    (H-1)
                                                               0          if i  s  Nb u, v 

               b)    update the value of Nb(u, v) as given in Equation (H-2):

                                              Nb u, v   max 0, Nb u, v   s                                     (H-2)

H.2       Description of the Maxshift method
H.2.1     Encoding of ROI (informative)
The encoding of the quantized transform coefficients is done in a similar way to encoding without any ROIs. At the
encoder side an ROI mask is created describing which quantized transform coefficients must be encoded with better
quality (even up to losslessly) in order to encode the ROI with better quality (up to lossless). The ROI mask is a bit map
describing these coefficients. See H.3 for details on how the mask is generated.
The quantized transform coefficients outside of the ROI mask, called background coefficients, are scaled down so that
the bits associated with the ROI are placed in higher bit-planes than the background. This means that when the entropy
coder encodes the quantized transform coefficients, the bit-planes associated with the ROI are coded before the
information associated with the background.
The method can be described using the following steps:
          1)   Generate ROI mask, M(x, y) (see H.3).
          2)   Find the scaling value s (see H.2.2).
          3)   Add s LSBs to each coefficient qb u, v  . The number M´b of magnitude bit-planes will then be:

                                                        M ´b  M b  s                                                 (H-3)


134        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                               ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

               where Mb is given by Equation (E-2) and the new value of each coefficient is given by:

                                                  qb u, v   qb u, v   2 s                                       (H-4)

          4)   Scale down all background coefficients given by M(x, y) using the scaling value s (see H.3). Thus, if
                qb u, v  is a background coefficient given by M(x, y), then:

                                                                q u, v 
                                                    qb u, v   b                                                    (H-5)
                                                                   2s

          5)   Write the scaling value s into the codestream using the SPrgn parameter of the RGN marker segment.
After these steps the quantized transform coefficients are entropy coded as usual.

H.2.2     Selection of scaling value, s, at encoder side (informative)
The scaling value, s, may be chosen so that Equation (H-6) holds, where max(Mb) is the largest number of magnitude bit-
planes, see Equation (E-1), for any background coefficient, qBG(x, y) in any code-block in the current component.

                                                       s  maxM b                                                   (H-6)

This guarantees that the scaling value used will be sufficiently large to ensure all the significant bits associated with the
ROI will be in higher bit-planes than all the significant bits associated with the background.

H.3       Remarks on region of interest coding (informative)
The ROI functionality described in H.2 depends only on the scaling value chosen on the encoder side and hence only on
the amplitude of the coefficients on the decoder side. It is up to the encoder to generate a mask that corresponds to the
coefficients that need to be encoded with better quality to yield an ROI with better quality than the background.
Clause H.3.1 describes how to generate the ROI mask for a particular region in the image. Clause H.3.2 describes how to
generate the mask in the case of multi-component images and H.3.3 describes how to generate the ROI mask for disjoint
regions. Clause H.3.4 describes a possible way to deal with the increase of coefficient bit depth. Clause H.3.5 describes
how the ROI mask can be extended so as to not correspond exactly to a region in the image domain and how the Maxshift
method may be used to encode the ROI and the background with different quality.

H.3.1     Region of interest mask generation (informative)
To achieve an ROI with better quality than the rest of the image while maintaining a fair amount of compression, bits
need to be saved by sending less information for the background. To do this an ROI mask is calculated. The mask is a
bit-plane indicating a set of quantized transform coefficients whose coding is sufficient in order for the receiver to
reconstruct the desired region with better quality than the background (up to lossless).
To illustrate the concept of ROI mask generation, let us restrict ourselves to a single ROI and a single image component,
and identify the samples that belong to the ROI in the image domain by a binary mask, M(x, y), where:

                                     1            wavelet coefficien t x, y  is needed
                         M x, y                                                                                   (H-7)
                                     0 accuracy on x, y  can be sacrificed without affecting ROI
The mask is a map of the ROI in the wavelet domain so that it has a non-zero value inside the ROI and 0 outside. In each
step the LL sub-band of the mask is then updated row by row and then column by column. The mask will then indicate
which coefficients are needed at this step so that the inverse wavelet transformation will reproduce the coefficients of the
previous mask.
For example, the last step of the inverse wavelet transformation is a composition of two sub-bands into one. Then to trace
this step backwards, one finds the coefficients of both sub-bands that are needed. The step before that is a composition of
four sub-bands into two. To trace this step backwards, the coefficients in the four sub-bands that are needed to give a
perfect reconstruction of the coefficients included in the mask for two sub-bands are found.
All steps are then traced backwards to give the mask. If the coefficients corresponding to the mask are transmitted and
received, and the inverse wavelet transformation calculated on them, the desired ROI will be reconstructed with better
quality than the rest of the image (up to lossless if the ROI coefficients were coded losslessly).




                                                                                   Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)            135
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

Given below is a description of how the expansion of the mask is acquired from the various filters. Similar methods can
be used for other filters.

H.3.1.1 Region of interest mask generation using the 5-3 reversible filter (informative)
In order to get the optimal set of quantized coefficients to be scaled, the following equations described in this clause
should be used.
To see what coefficients need to be in the mask, the inverse wavelet transformation is studied. Equations (F-5) and (F-6)
give the coefficients needed to reconstruct X(2n) and X(2n + 1) losslessly. It can immediately be seen that these are L(n),
L(n + 1), H(n – 1), H(n), H(n + 1) (see Figure H.1). Hence if X(2n) and X(2n + 1) are in the ROI, the listed low and high
sub-band coefficients are in the mask. Notice that X(2n) and X(2n + 1) are even and odd indexed points respectively,
relative to the origin of the reference grid.

                                        Low                                     High

                         n–1        n         n+1                 n–1       n      n+1




                                              2n    2n + 1
                                                                                             T.800_FH-1
                                                     X:s

                   Figure H.1 – The inverse wavelet transformation with the 5-3 reversible filter

H.3.1.2 Region of interest mask generation using the 9-7 irreversible filter (informative)
Successful decoding does not depend upon the selection of samples to be scaled. In order to get the optimal set of
quantized coefficients to be scaled the following equations described in this clause should be used.
To see what coefficients need to be in the mask, the inverse wavelet transformation is studied as in H.3.1.1. Figure H.2
shows this X(2n) and X(2n + 1) are even and odd indexed points respectively, related to the origin of the reference grid.

                          Low                                                                  High

          n–2     n–1       n     n+1     n+2                       n–3     n–2        n–1       n          n+1        n+2   n+3




                                                             2n    2n + 1
                                                                                                          T.800_FH-2
                                                                    X:s

                  Figure H.2 – The inverse wavelet transformation with the 9-7 irreversible filter




136        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                 ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

The coefficients needed to reconstruct X(2n) and X(2n + 1) losslessly can immediately be seen to be L(n – 1) to L(n + 2)
and H(n – 2) to H(n + 2). Hence if X(2n) and X(2n + 1) are in the ROI, these low and high sub-band coefficients are in
the mask.

H.3.2     Multi-component remark (informative)
For the case of colour images, the method applies separately in each colour component. If some of the colour components
are down-sampled, the mask for the down-sampled components is created in the same way as the mask for the non-down-
sampled components.

H.3.3     Disjoint regions remark (informative)
If the ROI consists of disjoint parts, then all parts have the same scaling value s.

H.3.4     Implementation precision remark (informative)
This ROI coding method might in some cases create situations where the dynamic range is exceeded. This is however
easily solved by simply discarding the least significant bit-planes that exceed the limit due to the down-scaling operation.
The effect will be that the ROI will have better quality than the background, even though the entire bit stream is decoded.
It might however create problems when the image is coded with ROIs in a lossless mode. Discarding least significant
bit-planes for the background might result in the background not being coded losslessly and in the worst case not being
reconstructed at all. This depends on the dynamic range available.

H.3.5     An example of the usage of the Maxshift method (informative)
The Maxshift method, as described above, allows the user/application to specify multiple regions of arbitrary shape, which
will be assigned higher priority compared to the rest of the image. The method does not require encoding or decoding of
the ROI shape.
The Maxshift method allows the implementers of an encoder to exploit a number of functionalities that are supported by
a compliant decoder. For example, it is possible to use the Maxshift method to encode an image with different quality for
the ROI and the background. The image is quantized so that the ROI gets the desired quality (lossy or lossless) and then
the Maxshift method is applied. If the image is encoded progressively by layer, not all of the layers of the wavelet
coefficients belonging to the background need be encoded. This corresponds to using different quantization steps for the
ROI and the background.
If the ROI is to be encoded losslessly, the most optimal set of wavelet coefficients giving a lossless result for the ROI is
described by the mask generated using the algorithms described in H.3.1 However, the Maxshift method supports the use
of any mask since the decoder does not need to generate the mask. Thus, it is possible for the encoder to include an entire
sub-band, e.g. the low-low sub-band, in the ROI mask and thus send a low-resolution version of the background at an
early stage of the progressive transmission. This is done by scaling all the quantized transform coefficients of the entire
sub-band. In other words, the user can decide in which sub-band he will start coding ROI and thus, it is not necessary to
wait for the entire ROI before receiving any information for the background.




                                                                                       Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)       137
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

