                                                          Annex I

                                                   JP2 file format syntax
                    (This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation | International Standard.
                                    This annex is optional for the minimum decoder.)


In this annex, the flow charts and tables are normative only in the sense that they are defining an output that alternative
implementations shall duplicate.

I.1       File format scope
This annex defines an optional file format that applications may choose to use to wrap JPEG 2000 compressed image
data. While not all applications will use this format, many applications will find that this format meets their needs.
However, those applications that do implement this file format shall implement it as described in this entire annex.
This annex:
          –      specifies a binary container for both image and metadata;
          –      specifies a mechanism to indicate image properties, such as the tonescale or colourspace of the image;
          –      specifies a mechanism by which readers may recognize the existence of intellectual property rights
                 information in the file;
          –      specifies a mechanism by which metadata (including vendor-specific information) can be included in files
                 specified by this Recommendation | International Standard.

I.2       Introduction to the JP2 file format
The JPEG 2000 file format (JP2 file format) provides a foundation for storing application specific data (metadata) in
association with a JPEG 2000 codestream, such as information which is required to display the image. As many
applications require a similar set of information to be associated with the compressed image data, it is useful to define the
format of that set of data along with the definition of the compression technology and codestream syntax.
Conceptually, the JP2 file format encapsulates the JPEG 2000 codestream along with other core pieces of information
about that codestream. The building-block of the JP2 file format is called a box. All information contained within the JP2
file is encapsulated in boxes. This Recommendation | International Standard defines several types of boxes; the definition
of each specific box type defines the kinds of information that may be found within a box of that type. Some boxes will
be defined to contain other boxes.

I.2.1     File identification
JP2 files can be identified using several mechanisms. When stored in traditional computer file systems, JP2 files should
be given the file extension "jp2" (readers should allow mixed case for the alphabetic characters). On Macintosh file
systems, JP2 files should be given the type code 'jp2\040'.

I.2.2     File organization
A JP2 file represents a collection of boxes. Some of those boxes are independent, and some of those boxes contain other
boxes. The binary structure of a file is a contiguous sequence of boxes. The start of the first box shall be the first byte of
the file, and the last byte of the last box shall be the last byte of the file.
The binary structure of a box is defined in I.4.
Logically, the structure of a JP2 file is as shown in Figure I.1. Boxes with dashed borders are optional in conforming JP2
files. However, an optional box may define mandatory boxes within that optional box. In that case, if the optional box
exists, those mandatory boxes within the optional box shall exist. If the optional box does not exist, then the mandatory
boxes within those boxes shall also not exist.




138           Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                               ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                        JP2 file
                             JPEG 2000 Signature box (I.5.1)
                             File Type box (I.5.2)
                             JP2 Header box (superbox) (I.5.3)
                                   Image Header box (I.5.3.1)
                                   Bits Per Component box (I.5.3.2)
                                   Colour Specification box 0 (I.5.3.3)


                                   Colour Specification box n – 1 ( I.5.3.3)
                                   Palette box (I.5.3.4)
                                   Component Mapping box (I.5.3.5)
                                   Channel Definition box (I.5.3.6)
                                   Resolution box (superbox) (I.5.3.7)
                                       Capture Resolution box (I.5.3.7.1)
                                       Default Display Resolution box (I.5.3.7.2)



                            Contiguous Codestream box (I.5.4) 0


                             Contiguous Codestream box (I.5.4) m – 1
                             IPR box (I.6)
                             XML boxes (I.7.1)
                             UUID boxes (I.7.2)
                             UUID Info boxes (superbox) (I.7.3)
                                   UUID List box (I.7.3.1)
                                   Data Entry URL box (I.7.3.2)


                                                                                             T.800_FI.1


                                       Figure I.1 – Conceptual structure of a JP2 file


Figure I.1 specifies only the containment relationship between the boxes in the file. A particular order of those boxes in
the file is not generally implied. However, the JPEG 2000 Signature box shall be the first box in a JP2 file, the File Type
box shall immediately follow the JPEG 2000 Signature box and the JP2 Header box shall fall before the Contiguous
Codestream box.
The file shown in Figure I.1 is a strict sequence of boxes. Other boxes may be found between the boxes defined in this
Recommendation | International Standard. However, all information contained within a JP2 file shall be in the box format;
byte-streams not in the box format shall not be found in the file.
As shown in Figure I.1, a JP2 file contains a JPEG 2000 Signature box, JP2 Header box, and one or more Contiguous
Codestream boxes. A JP2 file may also contain other boxes as determined by the file writer. For example, a JP2 file may
contain several XML boxes (containing metadata) between the JP2 Header box and the first Contiguous Codestream box.

I.2.3     Greyscale, colour, palette, multi-component specification
The JP2 file format provides two methods to specify the colourspace of the image. The enumerated method specifies the
colourspace of an image by specifying a numeric value that identifies the colourspace. In this Recommendation |
International Standard, images in the sRGB and sYCC colourspaces and greyscale images can be defined using the
enumerated method.
The JP2 file format also provides for the specification of the colourspace of an image by embedding one of a restricted
subset of ICC Input and Display profiles in the file. The restricted subset of ICC profiles is defined in I.3.2. Their use

                                                                                    Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)         139
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

allows for the specification of a wide range of greyscale and RGB class colourspaces, as well as some other spaces that
can be represented by those two profile classes.
In addition to specifying the colourspace of the image, this Recommendation | International Standard provides a means
by which a single component palettized image can be decoded and converted back to a multiple-component form by the
translation from index space to multiple-component space. Any such depalettization is applied before the colourspace is
interpreted. In the case of palettized images, the specification of the colourspace of the image is applied to the multiple
component values stored in the palette.

I.2.4     Inclusion of opacity channels
The JP2 file format provides a means to indicate the presence of auxiliary channels (such as opacity), to define the type
of these channels, and to specify the ordering and source of these channels (whether they are directly extracted from the
codestream or generated by applying a palette to a codestream component). When a reader opens the JP2 file, it will
determine the ordering and type of each component. The application must then match the component definition and
ordering from the JP2 file with the component ordering as defined by the colourspace specification. Once the file
components have been mapped to the colour channels, the decompressed image can be processed through any needed
colourspace transformations.
In many applications, components other than the colour channels are required. For example, many images used on web
pages contain opacity information; the browser uses this information to blend the image into the background. It is thus
desirable to include both the colour and auxiliary channels within a single codestream.
How applications deal with opacity or other auxiliary channels is outside the scope of this Recommendation | International
Standard.

I.2.5     Metadata
One important aspect of the JP2 file format is the ability to add metadata to a JP2 file. Because all information is
encapsulated in boxes, and all boxes have types, the format provides a simple mechanism for a reader to extract relevant
information, while ignoring any box that contains information that is not understood by that particular reader. In this way,
new boxes can be created, either through this or other Recommendations | International Standards or private
implementation. Also, any new box added to a JP2 file shall not change the visual appearance of the image.

I.2.6     Conformance with the file format
All conforming files shall contain all boxes required by this Recommendation | International Standard, and those boxes
shall be as defined in this Recommendation | International Standard. Also, all conforming readers shall correctly interpret
all required boxes defined in this Recommendation | International Standard and thus shall correctly interpret all
conforming files.

I.3       Greyscale/Colour/Palettized/multi-component specification architecture
One of the most important aspects of a file format is that it specifies the colourspace of the contained image data. In order
to properly display or interpret the image data, it is essential that the colourspace of that image is properly characterized.
The JP2 file format provides a multi-level mechanism for characterizing the colourspace of an image.

I.3.1     Enumerated method
The simplest method for characterizing the colourspace of an image is to specify an integer code representing the
colourspace in which the image is encoded. This method handles the specification of sRGB, greyscale and sYCC images.
Extensions to this method can be used to specify other colourspaces, including the definition of multi-component images.
For example, the image file may indicate that a particular image is encoded in the sRGB colourspace. To properly interpret
and display the image, an application must natively understand the definition of the sRGB colourspace. Because an
application must natively understand each specified colourspace, the complexity of this method is dependent on the exact
colourspaces specified. Also, the complexity of this mechanism is proportional to the number of colourspaces that are
specified and required for conformance. While this method provides a high level of interoperability for images encoded
using colourspaces for which correct interpretation is required for conformance, this method is very inflexible. This
Recommendation | International Standard defines a specific set of colourspaces for which interpretation is required for
conformance.

I.3.2     Restricted ICC profile method
An application may also specify the colourspace of an image using a restricted subset of ICC profiles. This method handles
the specification of the most commonly used RGB and greyscale class colourspaces through a low-complexity method.




140        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                              ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

An ICC profile is a standard representation of the transformation required to convert one colourspace into another
colourspace. With respect to the JP2 file format, an ICC profile defines how decompressed samples from the codestream
are converted into a standard colourspace (the Profile Connection Space (PCS)). Depending on the original colourspace
of the samples, this transformation may be either very simple or very complex.
ISO 15076-1defines two classes of ICC profiles, Input and Display, with profile types that are simple to implement. They
are the Monochrome and Three-Component Matrix-Based Input Profiles and the Monochrome and Three-Component
Matrix-Based Display profiles. These profiles limit the transformation from the source colourspace to the PCS XYZ to the
application of either a non-linearity curve in the case of the Monochrome Input and Display profiles or a non-linearity
curve and a 3 × 3 matrix in the case of the Three-Component Matrix-Based Input and Display Profiles. All applications,
including simple devices, are expected to be able to process the image through these transformations. All conforming
applications are required to correctly interpret the colourspace of any image that specifies the colourspace using this
restricted subset of possible ICC profile types. Although restricted, these ICC profiles are fully compliant ICC profiles
and the image can therefore be processed through any ICC compliant engine that supports profiles as defined in
ISO 15076-1.
For the JP2 file format, profiles shall conform to the ICC profile definition as defined by ISO 15076-1, including the
restrictions specified above. Clause J.8 has a more detailed description of the legal colourspace transforms, how these
transforms are stored in the file, and how to process an image using this transform without using an ICC colour
management engine.

I.3.3     Using multiple methods
Architecturally, the format allows for multiple methods to be embedded in a file and allows other standards to define
additional enumerated methods and to define extended methods. This provides readers conforming to these extensions a
choice as to what image processing path should be used to interpret the colourspace of the image. However, the first
method found in the file (in the first Colourspace Specification box in the JP2 Header box) shall be one of the methods
as defined and restricted in this Recommendation | International Standard. A conforming reader shall use that first method
and ignore all other methods (in additional Colourspace Specification boxes) found in the file.

I.3.4     Palettized images
In addition to specifying the interpretation of the image in terms of colourspace, this Recommendation | International
Standard allows for the decoding of a single component where the value of that single component represents an index
into a palette of colours. The input of a decompressed sample to the palette converts the single value to a
multiple-component tuple. The value of that tuple represents the colour of that sample; that tuple shall then be interpreted
according to the other colour specification methods (Enumerated or Restricted ICC) as if that multiple-component sample
had been directly extracted from multiple components in the codestream.

I.3.5     Interactions with the decorrelating multiple component transform
The specification of colour within the JP2 file format is independent of the use of a multiple component transformation
within the codestream (the CSsiz parameter of the SIZ marker segment as specified in A.5.1 and in Annex G). The
colourspace transformations specified through the sequence of Colour Specification boxes shall be applied to the image
samples after the reverse multiple component transformation has been applied to the decompressed samples. While the
application of these decorrelating component transformations is separate, the application of an encoder-based multiple
component transformation will often improve the compression of colour image data.

I.3.6     Key to graphical descriptions (informative)
Each box is described in terms of its function, usage and length. The function describes the information contained in the
box. The usage describes the logical location and frequency of this box in the file. The length describes which parameters
determine the length of the box.
These descriptions are followed by a figure that shows the order and relationship of the parameters in the box. Figure I.2
shows an example of this type of figure. A rectangle is used to indicate the parameters in the box. The width of the
rectangle is proportional to the number of bytes in the parameter. A shaded rectangle (diagonal stripes) indicates that the
parameter is of varying size. Two parameters with superscripts and a grey area between them indicate a run of several of
these parameters. A sequence of two groups of multiple parameters with superscripts separated by a grey area indicates a
run of that group of parameters (one set of each parameter in the group, followed by the next set of each parameter in the
group). Optional parameters or boxes will be shown with a dashed rectangle.




                                                                                  Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)            141
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

8-bit parameter        32-bit parameter                  Run of N parameters




       C      D                E               F          G0             GN–1        H0          J0            HM–1        JM–1

                                                                                                                          T.800_FI-2



                                    Variable size parameter                                Run of M sets of parameters

                                   Figure I.2 – Example of the box description figures


The figure is followed by a list that describes the meaning of each parameter in the box. If parameters are repeated, the
length and nature of the run of parameters is defined. As an example, in Figure I.2, parameters C, D, E and F are 8-, 16-,
32-bit and variable length respectively. The notation G0 and GN–1 implies that there are N different parameters, Gi, in a
row. The group of parameters H0 and HM–1, and J0 and JM–1 specify that the box will contain H0, followed by J0, followed
by H1 and J1, continuing to HM–1 and JM–1 (M instances of each parameter in total). Also, the field E is optional and may
not be found in this box.
After the list is a table that either describes the allowed parameter values or provides references to other tables that describe
these values.
In addition, in a figure describing the contents of a superbox, an ellipsis (…) will be used to indicate that the contents of
the file between two boxes are not specifically defined. Any box (or sequence of boxes), unless otherwise specified by
the definition of that box, may be found in place of the ellipsis.
For example, the superbox shown in Figure I.3 must contain an AA box and a BB box, and the BB box must follow the
AA box. However, there may be other boxes found between boxes AA and BB. Dealing with unknown boxes is discussed
in I.8.




                                Figure I.3 – Example of the superbox description figures

I.4        Box definition
Physically, each object in the file is encapsulated within a binary structure called a box. That binary structure is as
in Figure I.4:




                                             Figure I.4 – Organization of a box
           LBox:     Box length. This field specifies the length of the box, stored as a 4-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
                     This value includes all of the fields of the box, including the length and type. If the value of this field
                     is 1, then the XLBox field shall exist and the value of that field shall be the actual length of the box.
                     If the value of this field is 0, then the length of the box was not known when the LBox field was
                     written. In this case, this box contains all bytes up to the end of the file. If a box of length 0 is contained
                     within another box (its superbox), then the length of that superbox shall also be 0. This means that
                     this box is the last box in the file. The values 2-7 are reserved for ITU-T | ISO use.
           TBox:     Box type. This field specifies the type of information found in the DBox field. The value of this field
                     is encoded as a 4-byte big-endian unsigned integer. However, boxes are generally referred to by an
                     ISO/IEC 646 character string translation of the integer value. For all box types defined within this
                     Recommendation | International Standard, box types will be indicated as both character string
                     (normative) and as 4-byte hexadecimal integers (informative). Also, a space character is shown in the
                     character string translation of the box type as "\040". All values of TBox not defined within this
                     Recommendation | International Standard are reserved for ITU-T | ISO use.

142         Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                        ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

          XLBox: Box extended length. This field specifies the actual length of the box if the value of the LBox field is
                 1. This field is stored as an 8-byte big-endian unsigned integer. The value includes all of the fields of
                 the box, including the LBox, TBox and XLBox fields.
          DBox:     Box contents. This field contains the actual information contained within this box. The format of the
                    box contents depends on the box type and will be defined individually for each type.


                                          Table I.1 – Binary structure of a box

                           Field name                      Size (bits)                          Value
                                                                                                0, 1, or
                             LBox                                32
                                                                                             8 to (232– 1)
                             TBox                                32                            Variable
                                                                 64                   16 to (264– 1); if LBox = 1
                             XLBox
                                                                 0                   Not applicable; if LBox  1
                             DBox                           Variable                           Variable



For example, consider the illustration in Figure I.5 of a sequence of boxes, including one box that contains other boxes:

 Box 0                  Box 1                                                                                 Box 4
                                        Box 2                     Box 3



         LBox0                                   LBox2                               LBox3                            LBox4 T.800_FI-5



                                                             LBox1

                                         Figure I.5 – Illustration of box lengths


As shown in Figure I.5, the length of each box includes any boxes contained within that box. For example, the length of
Box 1 includes the length of Boxes 2 and 3, in addition to the LBox and TBox fields for Box 1 itself. In this case, if the
type of Box 1 was not understood by a reader, it would not recognize the existence of Boxes 2 and 3 because they would
be completely skipped by jumping the length of Box 1 from the beginning of Box 1.
Table I.2 lists all boxes defined by this Recommendation | International Standard. Indentation within the table indicates
the hierarchical containment structure of the boxes within a JP2 file.

                                                 Table I.2 – Defined boxes

         Box name                    Type                Superbox        Required?                        Comments
                                  'jP\040\040'                                          This box uniquely identifies the file as
 JPEG 2000 Signature box                                   No             Required
                                (0x6A50 2020)                                           being part of the JPEG 2000 family of files.
                                                                                        This box specifies file type, version and
                                                                                        compatibility information, including
                                    'ftyp'
 File Type box                                             No             Required      specifying if this file is a conforming JP2
                                (0x6674 7970)
                                                                                        file or if it can be read by a conforming JP2
                                                                                        reader.
                                                                                        This box contains a series of boxes that
                                    'jp2h'
 JP2 Header box                                            Yes            Required      contain header-type information about the
                                (0x6A70 3268)
                                                                                        file.
                                                                                        This box specifies aspects of the reference
                                    'ihdr'
    Image Header box                                       No             Required      grid geometry, number of components and
                                (0x6968 6472)
                                                                                        bit depth.
                                                                                        This box specifies the bit depth of the
                                    'bpcc'
    Bits Per Component box                                 No             Optional      components in the file in cases where the bit
                                (0x6270 6363)
                                                                                        depth is not constant across all components.




                                                                                          Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)              143
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)


                                                   Table I.2 – Defined boxes

            Box name                   Type            Superbox     Required?                     Comments
                                        'colr'                                    This box specifies the colourspace of the
        Colour Specification box                          No         Required
                                   (0x636F 6C72)                                  image.
                                                                                  This box specifies the palette which maps a
                                        'pclr'
        Palette box                                       No          Optional    single component in index space to a
                                   (0x7063 6C72)
                                                                                  multiple-component image.
        Component Mapping              'cmap'                                     This box specifies the mapping between a
                                                          No          Optional
        box                        (0x636D 6170)                                  palette and codestream components.
                                                                                  This box specifies the type and ordering of
                                       'cdef'                                     the components within the codestream, as
        Channel Definition box                            No          Optional
                                   (0x6364 6566)                                  well as those created by the application of a
                                                                                  palette.
                                      'res\040'                                   This box contains the grid resolution.
        Resolution box                                    Yes         Optional
                                   (0x7265 7320)
           Capture Resolution          'resc'                                     This box specifies the grid resolution at
                                                          No          Optional
           box                     (0x7265 7363)                                  which the image was captured.
           Default Display             'resd'                                     This box specifies the default grid resolution
                                                          No          Optional
           Resolution box          (0x7265 7364)                                  at which the image should be displayed.
                                       'jp2c'                                     This box contains the codestream as defined
 Contiguous Codestream box                                No         Required
                                   (0x6A70 3263)                                  by Annex A.
                                       'jp2i'                                     This box contains intellectual property
 Intellectual Property box                                No          Optional
                                   (0x6A70 3269)                                  information about the image.
                                                                                  This box provides a tool by which vendors
                                      'xml\040'
 XML box                                                  No          Optional    can add XML formatted information to a
                                   (0x786D 6C20)
                                                                                  JP2 file.
                                                                                  This box provides a tool by which vendors
                                       'uuid'
 UUID box                                                 No          Optional    can add additional information to a file
                                   (0x7575 6964)
                                                                                  without risking conflict with other vendors.
                                                                                  This box provides a tool by which a vendor
                                       'uinf'
 UUID Info box                                            Yes         Optional    may provide access to additional
                                   (0x7569 6E66)
                                                                                  information associated with a UUID.
                                       'ulst'                                     This box specifies a list of UUIDs.
        UUID List box                                     No          Optional
                                   (0x7563 7374)
                                      'url\040'                                   This box specifies a URL.
        URL box                                           No          Optional
                                   (0x7572 6C20)


I.5          Defined boxes
The following boxes shall properly be interpreted by all conforming readers. Each of these boxes conforms to the standard
box structure as defined in I.4. The following clauses define the value of the DBox field from Table I.1 (the contents of
the box). It is assumed that the LBox, TBox and XLBox fields exist for each box in the file as defined in I.4.

I.5.1        JPEG 2000 Signature box
The JPEG 2000 Signature box identifies that the format of this file was defined by the JPEG 2000 Recommendation |
International Standard, as well as providing a small amount of information which can help determine the validity of the
rest of the file. The JPEG 2000 Signature box shall be the first box in the file, and all files shall contain one and only one
JPEG 2000 Signature box.
The type of the JPEG 2000 Signature box shall be 'jP\040\040' (0x6A50 2020). The length of this box shall be 12 bytes.
The contents of this box shall be the 4-byte character string '<CR><LF><0x87><LF>' (0x0D0A 870A). For file
verification purposes, this box can be considered a fixed-length 12-byte string which shall have the value:
0x0000 000C 6A50 2020 0D0A 870A.
The combination of the particular type and contents for this box enable an application to detect a common set of file
transmission errors. The CR-LF sequence in the contents catches bad file transfers that alter newline sequences. The final
linefeed checks for the inverse of the CR-LF translation problem. The third character of the box contents has its high-bit
set to catch bad file transfers that clear bit 7.




144           Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                         ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

I.5.2     File Type box
The File Type box specifies the Recommendation | International Standard which completely defines all of the contents of
this file, as well as a separate list of readers, defined by other Recommendations | International Standards, with which this
file is compatible, and thus the file can be properly interpreted within the scope of that other standard. This box shall
immediately follow the JPEG 2000 Signature box. This differentiates between the standard which completely describes
the file, from other standards that interpret a subset of the file.
All files shall contain one and only one File Type box.
The type of the File Type box shall be 'ftyp' (0x6674 7970). The contents of this box shall be as in Figure I.6:


                                      BR              MinV              CL0                    CLN–1

                                                                                                   T.800_FI-6



                               Figure I.6 – Organization of the contents of a File Type box
          BR:         Brand. This field specifies the Recommendation | International Standard which completely defines
                      this file. This field is specified by a four-byte string of ISO/IEC 646 characters. The value of this field
                      is defined in Table I.3:

                                                  Table I.3 – Legal Brand values

                          Value                                         Meaning
                         'jp2\040'         Rec. ITU-T T.800 | ISO/IEC 15444-1, Annex I
                                           (This Recommendation | International Standard)
                       other values        Reserved for other ITU-T | ISO uses
                      In addition, the Brand field shall be considered functionally equivalent to a major version number. A
                      major version change (if there ever is one), representing an incompatible change in the JP2 file format,
                      shall define a different value for the Brand field.
                      If the value of the Brand field is not 'jp2\040', then a value of 'jp2\040' in the Compatibility list
                      indicates that a JP2 reader can interpret the file in the manner intended by the creator of the file.
          MinV:       Minor version. This parameter defines the minor version number of this JP2 specification for which
                      the file complies. The parameter is defined as a 4-byte big-endian unsigned integer. The value of this
                      field shall be zero. However, readers shall continue to parse and interpret this file even if the value of
                      this field is not zero.
          CLi:        Compatibility list. This field specifies a code representing this Recommendation | International
                      Standard, another standard, or a profile of another standard, to which the file conforms. This field is
                      encoded as a four-byte string of ISO/IEC 646 characters. A file that conforms to this Recommendation
                      | International Standard shall have at least one CLi field in the File Type box, and shall contain the
                      value 'jp2\040' in one of the CLi fields in the File Type box, and all conforming readers shall properly
                      interpret all files with 'jp2\040' in one of the CLi fields
                 If one of the CLi fields contains the value "J2P0" then the first codestream contained within this JP2 file is
                      restricted as described for Profile-0 from Table A.45.
                 If one of the CLi fields contains the value "J2P1" then the first codestream contained within this JP2 file is
                      restricted as described for Profile-1 from Table A.45.
                 Other values of the Compatibility list field are reserved for ITU-T | ISO use.
                 The number of CLi fields is determined by the length of this box.

                                     Table I.4 – Format of the contents of the File Type box

                             Field name                       Size (bits)                        Value
                                  BR                              32                          0 to (232– 1)
                                MinV                              32                               0
                                  CLi                             32                          0 to (232– 1)




                                                                                            Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)       145
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

I.5.3        JP2 Header box (superbox)
The JP2 Header box contains generic information about the file, such as the number of components, colourspace and grid
resolution. This box is a superbox. Within a JP2 file, there shall be one and only one JP2 Header box. The JP2 Header
box may be located anywhere within the file after the File Type box but before the Contiguous Codestream box. It also
must be at the same level as the JPEG 2000 Signature and File Type boxes (it shall not be inside any other superbox
within the file).
The type of the JP2 Header box shall be 'jp2h' (0x6A70 3268).
This box contains several boxes. Other boxes may be defined in other standards and may be ignored by conforming
readers. Those boxes contained within the JP2 Header box that are defined within this Recommendation | International
Standard are as in Figure I.7:


      ihdr            bpcc           colr0      colrn–1          pclr           cmap            cdef            res
                                                                                                                       T.800_FI-7


                              Figure I.7 – Organization of the contents of a JP2 Header box
             ihdr:     Image Header box. This box specifies information about the reference grid geometry, bit depth and
                       the number of components. This box shall be the first box in the JP2 Header box.
             bpcc:     Bits Per Component box. This box specifies the bit depth of each component in the codestream after
                       decompression. Its structure is specified in I.5.3.2. This box may be found anywhere in the JP2 Header
                       box provided that it comes after the Image Header box.
             colri:    Colour Specification boxes. These boxes specify the colourspace of the decompressed image. Their
                       structures are specified in I.5.3.3. There shall be at least one Colour Specification box within the JP2
                       Header box. The use of multiple Colour Specification boxes provides the ability for a decoder to be
                       given multiple optimization or compatibility options for colour processing. These boxes may be found
                       anywhere in the JP2 Header box provided that they come after the Image Header box. All Colour
                       Specification boxes shall be contiguous within the JP2 Header box.
             pclr:     Palette box. This box defines the palette to be used to create multiple components from a single
                       component. Its structure is specified in I.5.3.4. This box may be found anywhere in the JP2 Header
                       box provided that it comes after the Image Header box.
             cmap:     Component Mapping box. This box defines how image channels are identified from the actual
                       components in the codestream. Its structure is specified in I.5.3.5. This box may be found anywhere
                       in the JP2 Header box provided that it comes after the Image Header box.
             cdef:     Channel Definition box. This box defines the channels in the image. Its structure is specified in I.5.3.6.
                       This box may be found anywhere in the JP2 Header box provided that it comes after the Image Header
                       box.
             res:      Resolution box. This box specifies the capture and default display grid resolutions of the image. Its
                       structure is specified in I.5.3.7. This box may be found anywhere in the JP2 Header box provided that
                       it comes after the Image Header box.

I.5.3.1      Image Header box
This box contains fixed length generic information about the image, such as the image size and number of components.
The contents of the JP2 Header box shall start with an Image Header box. Instances of this box in other places in the file
shall be ignored. The length of the Image Header box shall be 22 bytes, including the box length and type fields. Much
of the information within the Image Header box is redundant with information stored in the codestream itself.
All references to "the codestream" in the descriptions of fields in this Image Header box apply to the codestream found
in the first Contiguous Codestream box in the file. Files that contain contradictory information between the Image Header
box and the first codestream are not conforming files. However, readers may choose to attempt to read these files by using
the values found within the codestream.
The type of the Image Header box shall be 'ihdr' (0x6968 6472) and the contents of the box shall have the format as in
Figure I.8:




146           Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                       ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)


              HEIGHT              WIDTH             NC      BPC   C   UnkC   IPR
                                                                                   T.800_FI-8


          Figure I.8 – Organization of the contents of an Image Header box
HEIGHT:   Image area height. The value of this parameter indicates the height of the image area. This field
          is stored as a 4-byte big-endian unsigned integer. The value of this field shall be Ysiz – YOsiz,
          where Ysiz and YOsiz are the values of the respective fields in the SIZ marker in the codestream.
          See Figure B.1 for an illustration of the image area. However, reference grid points are not
          necessarily square; the aspect ratio of a reference grid point is specified by the Resolution box.
          If the Resolution box is not present, then a reader shall assume that reference grid points are
          square.
          The HEIGHT is not always the same as the default image height. See I.5.3.1.1 for formulae
          specifying the default image dimensions when no other rendering information is present. The
          HEIGHT value will always be an upper bound on the default image height.
WIDTH:    Image area width. The value of this parameter indicates the width of the image area. This field
          is stored as a 4-byte big-endian unsigned integer. The value of this field shall be Xsiz – XOsiz,
          where Xsiz and XOsiz are the values of the respective fields in the SIZ marker in the codestream.
          See Figure B.1 for an illustration of the image area. However, reference grid points are not
          necessarily square; the aspect ratio of a reference grid point is specified by the Resolution box.
          If the Resolution box is not present, then a reader shall assume that reference grid points are
          square.
          The WIDTH is not always the same as the default image width. See I.5.3.1.1 for formulae
          specifying the default image dimensions when no other rendering information is present. The
          WIDTH value will always be an upper bound on the default image width.
NC:       Number of components. This parameter specifies the number of components in the codestream
          and is stored as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer. The value of this field shall be equal to the
          value of the Csiz field in the SIZ marker in the codestream.
BPC:      Bits per component. This parameter specifies the bit depth of the components in the codestream,
          minus 1, and is stored as a 1-byte field.
          If the bit depth and the sign are the same for all components, then this parameter specifies that
          bit depth and shall be equivalent to the values of the Ssizi fields in the SIZ marker in the
          codestream (which shall all be equal). If the components vary in bit depth and/or sign, then the
          value of this field shall be 255 and the JP2 Header box shall also contain a Bits Per Component
          box defining the bit depth of each component (as defined in I.5.3.2).
          The low 7-bits of the value indicate the bit depth of the components. The high-bit indicates
          whether the components are signed or unsigned. If the high-bit is 1, then the components contain
          signed values. If the high-bit is 0, then the components contain unsigned values.
C:        Compression type. This parameter specifies the compression algorithm used to compress the
          image data. The value of this field shall be 7. It is encoded as a 1-byte unsigned integer. Other
          values are reserved for ITU-T | ISO use.
UnkC:     Colourspace unknown. This field specifies if the actual colourspace of the image data in the
          codestream is known. This field is encoded as a 1-byte unsigned integer. Legal values for this
          field are 0, if the colourspace of the image is known and correctly specified in the Colourspace
          Specification boxes within the file, or 1 if the colourspace of the image is not known. A value of
          1 will be used in cases such as the transcoding of legacy images where the actual colourspace of
          the image data is not known. In these cases, while the colourspace interpretation methods
          specified in the file may not accurately reproduce the image with respect to an original, the image
          should be treated as if the methods do accurately reproduce the image. Values other than 0 and
          1 are reserved for ITU-T | ISO use.
IPR:      Intellectual property. This parameter indicates whether this JP2 file contains intellectual property
          rights information. If the value of this field is 0, this file does not contain rights information, and
          thus the file does not contain an IPR box. If the value is 1, then the file does contain rights
          information and thus does contain an IPR box as defined in I.6. Other values are reserved for
          ITU-T | ISO use.




                                                                      Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)            147
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                              Table I.5 – Format of the contents of the Image Header box

                            Field name                      Size (bits)                        Value
                             HEIGHT                             32                          1 to (232– 1)
                              WIDTH                             32                          1 to (232– 1)
                                NC                              16                          1 to 16 384
                                BPC                              8                          See Table I.6
                                 C                               8                               7
                                Unk                              8                             0 to 1
                                IPR                              8                             0 to 1


                                                    Table I.6 – BPC values

                      Values (bits)
                                                              Component sample precision
                     MSB       LSB
                       x000 0000            Component bit depth = value + 1. From 1 bit deep to 38 bits deep
                           to               respectively (counting the sign bit, if appropriate)
                       x010 0101
                       0xxx xxxx            Components are unsigned values
                       1xxx xxxx            Components are signed values
                       1111 1111            Components vary in bit depth
                                            All other values reserved for ITU-T | ISO use
   NOTE – While I.5.3.1.1 defines the default image dimensions in pixels, the relation to physical dimensions is given by the Capture
   Resolution box (see I.5.3.7.1) and the Display Resolution box (see I.5.3.7.2). Note that image pixels might not be square.

I.5.3.1.1 Default image dimensions
In instances where only image samples for individual components are needed, refer directly to the component sample
dimension equation B-2.
However, when some rendering is required, lacking other rendering or expansion directives, the default image dimensions
aim to maintain the image area aspect ratio and are computed from the codestream SIZ marker as a function of M, the
greatest common divisor (gcd) of all the subsampling factors (XRsiz c, YRsizc) for all components of the image.
Specifically:

                                      M = gcd{XRsizc, YRsizc | for all c, 0 ≤ c < Csiz}                                        (I-1)

And the default image dimensions are:


                             (width, height) = 
                                                     Xsiz    XOsiz  ,  Ysiz    YOsiz  
                                                                                                                              (I-2)
                                                     M   M   M   M  

If M is equal to one, then the reference grid image area dimensions shown in WIDTH and HEIGHT are equal to the
default image width and height. Otherwise, when M > 1, the default image has dimensions smaller than WIDTH and
HEIGHT.
   NOTE – For example, suppose there is a codestream with Xsiz = Ysiz = 1024 and XOsiz = 3 and YOsiz = 2. This codestream in a
   JP2 file would have an Image Header box with WIDTH = 1021 and HEIGHT = 1022. The default image dimensions, however,
   will depend upon the values of XRsiz and YRsiz. A couple of examples are given:
              a) If any of the subsampling factors XRsizc or YRsizc is one, then M = 1, and the default image dimensions will equal
                  WIDTH and HEIGHT.
              b) If XRsiz = 2 and YRsiz = 4, then M = 2 and the default dimensions are image width = 512 – 2 = 510 and image
                  height = 512 – 1 = 511.
              c) If there are 3 components all with XRsizc = YRsizc = 4, then M = 4 and the default image width and height are
                  both 256 – 1 = 255.
              d) If there are 3 components with XRsiz0 = YRsiz0 = 2, XRsiz1 = YRsiz1 = 3, XRsiz2 = YRsiz2 = 2, then M = 1, and
                  the default image dimensions will equal WIDTH and HEIGHT.




148        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                      ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

I.5.3.2   Bits Per Component box
The Bits Per Component box specifies the bit depth of each component. If the bit depth of all components in the
codestream is the same (in both sign and precision), then this box shall not be found. Otherwise, this box specifies the bit
depth of each individual component. The order of bit depth values in this box is the actual order in which those components
are enumerated within the codestream. The exact location of this box within the JP2 Header box may vary provided that
it follows the Image Header box.
There shall be one and only one Bits Per Component box inside a JP2 Header box.
The type of the Bits Per Component box shall be 'bpcc' (0x6270 6363). The contents of this box shall be as in Figure I.9:




                        Figure I.9 – Organization of the contents of a Bits Per Component box
               i
          BPC :      Bits per component. This parameter specifies the bit depth of component i, minus 1, encoded as a
                     1-byte value. The ordering of the components within the Bits Per Component box shall be the same
                     as the ordering of the components within the codestream. The number of BPCi fields shall be the same
                     as the value of the NC field from the Image Header box. The value of this field shall be equivalent to
                     the respective Ssizi field in the SIZ marker in the codestream.
               The low 7-bits of the value indicate the bit depth of this component. The high-bit indicates whether the
                   component is signed or unsigned. If the high-bit is 1, then the component contains signed values. If
                   the high-bit is 0, then the component contains unsigned values.

                          Table I.7 – Format of the contents of the Bits Per Component box

                           Field name                     Size (bits)                         Value
                               BPCi                            8                        See Table I.8


                                                  Table I.8 – BPCi values

                     Values (bits)
                                                                   Component sample precision
                   MSB           LSB
                     x000 0000                Component bit depth = value + 1. From 1 bit deep to 38 bits deep
                         to                   respectively (counting the sign bit, if appropriate)
                     x010 0101
                     0xxx xxxx                Components are unsigned values
                     1xxx xxxx                Components are signed values
                                              All other values reserved for ITU-T | ISO use

I.5.3.3   Colour Specification box
Each Colour Specification box defines one method by which an application can interpret the colourspace of the
decompressed image data. This colour specification is to be applied to the channel, representing signed or unsigned
integers, and associated with colours according to the Channel Definition box (see I.5.3.6). The reconstructed numerical
values of channel number i are to be interpreted using the value BPC i in combination with the relevant colourspace
definition.
The symbol BPCi is defined here as follows: It shall be identical to the value of the Bj field of the Palette box (see I.5.3.4)
if channel i is the output of palette column j, or to the value of the Bits Per Component box BPCj if channel i is the direct
output of component j, or to the value of the BPC field of the Image Header box if no Bits Per Component box is present.
BPCi identifies the number of bits (bit precision) of the numerical values carried by channel i, including the sign bit if
present, minus one.
If the colourspace is defined by an ICC profile, the input channels should carry unsigned values; usage of signed samples
is discouraged and currently not defined by the ICC. The values xi of channel i shall be mapped to device colour values
di, as follows:

                                                di = Lmaxi * xi / (2BPCi+1 – 1)


                                                                                      Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)           149
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

Here, Lmaxi is the maximum input value associated with the relevant ICC tone reproduction curve.
If the colourspace is an enumerated colourspace and the values xi for channel i are unsigned quantities, they shall be
mapped to colour values di according to

                                             di = Lmini + (Lmaxi – Lmini) * xi / (2BPCi+1 – 1)

for the purpose of establishing a correct interpretation with respect to the colourspace. Here, Lmin i and Lmaxi are the
minimum and maximum allowed values for the relevant colour channel, in the numerical framework used to define the
colourspace.
If, however, the values xi for channel i, are signed quantities, they shall be mapped to colour values d i according to

                                        di = Lzeroi + (Lmaxi – Lzeroi) * xi / (2(BPCi AND 0x7f) – 1)

for the purpose of establishing a correct interpretation with respect to the colourspace. Here Lmaxi is again the maximum
allowed value for the relevant colour, in the numerical framework used to define the colourspace, while Lzero i is the value
of channel i in the representation of the colour that corresponds to the absence of any scene radiance, the complete
absorption of visible light or the achromatic level, if this interpretation is applicable and all channel values are uniquely
defined in this case.
Table I.10 defines both the enumerated colourspaces and the corresponding values of Lzero i, Lmini and Lmaxi for this
Recommendation | International Standard.
A JP2 file may contain multiple Colour Specification boxes, but must contain at least one, specifying different methods
for achieving "equivalent" results. A conforming JP2 reader shall ignore all Colour Specification boxes after the first.
However, readers conforming to other standards may use those boxes as defined in those other standards.
The type of a Colour Specification box shall be 'colr' (0x636F 6C72). The contents of a Colour Specification box is as in
Figure I.10:



                                      METH    PREC                EnumCS               PROFILE

                                                                                                     T.800_FI-10


                                                 APPROX

                         Figure I.10 – Organization of the contents of a Colour Specification box
          METH: Specification method. This field specifies the method used by this Colour Specification box to define
                the colourspace of the decompressed image. This field is encoded as a 1-byte unsigned integer. The
                value of this field shall be 1 or 2, as defined in Table I.9.

                                                     Table I.9 – Legal METH values

 Value                                                                    Meaning
      1   Enumerated Colourspace. This colourspace specification box contains the enumerated value of the colourspace of this image. The
          enumerated value is found in the EnumCS field in this box. If the value of the METH field is 1, then the EnumCS shall exist in this box
          immediately following the APPROX field, and the EnumCS field shall be the last field in this box.
      2   Restricted ICC profile. This Colour Specification box contains an ICC profile in the PROFILE field. This profile shall specify the
          transformation needed to convert the decompressed image data into the PCSXYZ, and shall conform to either the Monochrome Input, the
          Three-Component Matrix-Based Input profile class, the Monochrome Display or the Three-Component Matrix-Based Display class and
          contain all the required tags specified therein, as defined in ISO 15076-1. As such, the value of the Profile Connection Space field in the
          profile header in the embedded profile shall be 'XYZ\040' (0x5859 5A20) indicating that the output colourspace of the profile is in the
          XYZ colourspace.
          Any private tags in the ICC profile shall not change the visual appearance of an image processed using this ICC profile.
          The components from the codestream may have a range greater than the input range of the tone reproduction curve (TRC) of the ICC
          profile. Any decoded values should be clipped to the limits of the TRC before processing the image through the ICC profile. For
          example, negative sample values of signed components may be clipped to zero before processing the image data through the profile.
          See J.8 for a more detailed description of the legal colourspace transforms, for how these transforms are stored in the file, and how to
          process an image using that transform without using an ICC colour management engine.
          If the value of METH is 2, then the PROFILE field shall immediately follow the APPROX field and the PROFILE field shall be the last
          field in the box.
  other   Reserved for other ITU-T | ISO uses. If the value of METH is not 1 or 2, there may be fields in this box following the APPROX field,
 values   and a conforming JP2 reader shall ignore the entire Colour Specification box.



150        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                         ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

          PREC:           Precedence. This field is reserved for ITU-T | ISO use and the value shall be set to zero; however,
                          conforming readers shall ignore the value of this field. This field is specified as a signed 1-byte
                          integer.
          APPROX:         Colourspace approximation. This field specifies the extent to which this colour specification
                          method approximates the "correct" definition of the colourspace. The value of this field shall be
                          set to zero; however, conforming readers shall ignore the value of this field. Other values are
                          reserved for other ISO uses. This field is specified as a 1-byte unsigned integer.
          EnumCS:         Enumerated colourspace. This field specifies the colourspace of the image using integer codes.
                          To correctly interpret the colour of an image using an enumerated colourspace, the application
                          must know the definition of that colourspace internally. This field contains a 4-byte big-endian
                          unsigned integer value indicating the colourspace of the image. If the value of the METH field
                          is 2, then the EnumCS field shall not exist. Valid EnumCS values for the first colourspace
                          specification box in conforming files are limited to 16, 17 and 18 as defined in Table I.10:

                                            Table I.10 – Legal EnumCS values

  Value                                                              Meaning
    16         sRGB as defined by IEC 61966-2-1with Lmini=0 and Lmaxi=255. This colourspace shall be used with channels
               carrying unsigned values only.
    17         greyscale: A greyscale space where image luminance is related to code values using the sRGB non-linearity given
               in Equations (2) to (4) of IEC 61966-2-1 (sRGB) specification:

                                     Y´  d i                                                                         (I-1)

                                     for Y ´  0.04045, Ylin  Y ´ / 12.92                                          (I-2)


                                                                                   2.4
                                                                  Y ´  0.055 
                                     for Y ´  0.04045, Ylin               
                                                                  1.055 

               where Ylin is the linear image luminance value in the range 0.0 to 1.0 and d i is the channel input value scaled
               according to I.5.3.3 with Lmin i=0 and Lmaxi=1.0. The image luminance values should be interpreted relative to
               the reference conditions in Section 2 of IEC 61966-2-1.
               This colourspace shall be used with channels carrying unsigned values only.
    18         sYCC as defined by IEC 61966-2-1 Amd. 1with Lmin i=0 and Lmaxi=255. This colourspace shall be used with
               channels carrying unsigned values only.
               NOTE – It is not recommended to use the ICT or RCT specified in Annex G with sYCC image data. See J.14 for
               guidelines on handling YCC codestreams.
other values   Reserved for other ITU-T | ISO uses

          PROFILE:        ICC profile. This field contains a valid ICC profile, as specified by the ICC Profile Format
                          Specification, which specifies the transformation of the decompressed image data into the PCS.
                          This field shall not exist if the value of the METH field is 1. If the value of the METH field is 2,
                          then the ICC profile shall conform to the Monochrome Input Profile class, the Three-Component
                          Matrix-Based Input Profile class, the Monochrome Display profile type or the Three-Component
                          Matrix-Based Display profile type as defined in ISO 15076-1.

                         Table I.11 – Format of the contents of the Colour Specification box

                Field name               Size (bits)                                        Value
                  METH                          8                                           1 to 2
                   PREC                         8                                             0
                  APPROX                        8                                             0
                  EnumCS               32 if METH = 1                                    0 to (232– 1)
                                       0 if METH = 2                                       no value
                 PROFILE                  Variable              Variable; see the ICC Profile Format Specification,
                                                                              version ICC.1:1998-09.




                                                                                            Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)            151
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

I.5.3.4   Palette box
This box specifies a palette that can be used to create channels from components. However, the Palette box does not
specify the creation of any particular channel; the creation of channels based on the application of the palette to a
component is specified by the Component Mapping box. The colourspace or meaning of the generated channel is specified
by the Channel Definition box (or specified through the defaults defined in the specification of the Channel Definition
box if the Channel Definition box does not exist). If the JP2 Header box contains a Palette box, then it shall also contain
a Component Mapping box. If the JP2 Header box does not contain a Palette box, then it shall not contain a Component
Mapping box.
There shall be at most one Palette box inside a JP2 Header box.
The type of the Palette box shall be 'pclr' (0x7063 6C72). The contents of this box shall be as in Figure I.11:




                             Figure I.11 – Organization of the contents of the Palette box
          NE:       Number of entries in the table. This value shall be in the range 1 to 1024 and is encoded as a 2-byte
                    big-endian unsigned integer.
          NPC:      Number of palette columns specified in the Palette box. For example, if the palette is to be used to
                    map a single index component into a three-component RGB image, then the value of this field shall
                    be 3. This field is encoded as a 1-byte unsigned integer.
          Bi:       This parameter specifies the bit depth of values created by palette column i, encoded as a 1-byte big-
                    endian integer. The low 7-bits of the value indicate the bit depth of this palette column. The high-bit
                    indicates whether the palette column is signed or unsigned. If the high-bit is 1, then the palette column
                    contains signed values. If the high-bit is 0, then the palette column contains unsigned values. The
                    number of Bi values shall be the same as the value of the NPC field.
          Cji:      The value for entry j for palette column i. Cji values are organized in component major order; all of
                    the values for entry j are grouped together, followed by all of the values for entry j + 1. In the example
                    given above, this table would therefore read R1, G1 ,B1 ,R2 ,G2 ,B2, etc. The size of Cji is the value
                    specified by field Bi. The number of palette columns shall be the same as the NPC field. The number
                    of Cji values shall be the number of palette columns (the NPC field) times the number of entries in
                    the palette (NE). If the value of Bi is not a multiple of 8, then each Cji value is padded with zeros to a
                    multiple of 8 bits and the actual value shall be stored in the low-order bits of the padded value. For
                    example, if the value of Bi is 10 bits, then the individual Cji values shall be stored in the low 10 bits
                    of a 16-bit field.

                                Table I.12 – Format of the contents of the Palette box

                           Field name                    Size (bits)                     Value
                               NE                            16                        1 to 1024
                              NPC                            8                          1 to 255
                               Bi                            8                       See Table I.13
                               Cji                        Variable                      Variable




152        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                        ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                                                     Table I.13 – Bi values

                       Values (bits)
                                                             Palette column sample precision
                     MSB           LSB
                        x000 0000
                                            Palette column bit depth = value + 1. From 1 bit deep to 38 bits
                            to
                                            deep respectively (counting the sign bit, if appropriate)
                        x010 0101
                        0xxx xxxx           Palette column values are unsigned values
                        1xxx xxxx           Palette column values are signed values
                                            All other values reserved for ITU-T | ISO use.

I.5.3.5     Component Mapping box
The Component Mapping box defines how image channels are identified from the actual components decoded from the
codestream. This abstraction allows a single structure (the Channel Definition box) to specify the colour or type of both
palettized images and non-palettized images. This box contains an array of CMP i, MTYPi and PCOLi fields. Each group
of these fields represents the definition of one channel in the image. The channels are numbered in order starting with
zero, and the number of channels specified in the Component Mapping box is determined by the length of the box.
There shall be at most one Component Mapping box inside a JP2 Header box.
If the JP2 Header box contains a Palette box, then the JP2 Header box shall also contain a Component Mapping box. If
the JP2 Header box does not contain a Component Mapping box, the components shall be mapped directly to channels,
such that component i is mapped to channel i.
The type of the Component Mapping box shall be ‘cmap’ (0x636D 6170). The contents of this box shall be as in
Figure I.12:




                       Figure I.12 – Organization of the contents of a Component Mapping box
                 i
            CMP :    This field specifies the index of the component from the codestream that is mapped to this channel
                     (either directly or through a palette). This field is encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
            MTYPi: This field specifies how this channel is generated from the actual components in the file. This field is
                   encoded as a 1-byte unsigned integer. Legal values of the MTYP i field are as in Table I.14:

                                                Table I.14 – MTYPi field values

    Value                                                             Meaning
      0          Direct use. This channel is created directly from an actual component in the codestream. The index of the
                 component mapped to this channel is specified in the CMP i field for this channel.
      1          Palette mapping. This channel is created by applying the palette to an actual component in the codestream. The
                 index of the component mapped into the palette is specified in the CMP i field for this channel. The column from
                 the palette to use is specified in the PCOLi field for this channel.
   2 to 255      Reserved for ITU-T | ISO use
            PCOLi: This field specifies the index component from the palette that is used to map the actual component
                   from the codestream. This field is encoded as a 1-byte unsigned integer. If the value of the MTYPi
                   field for this channel is 0, then the value of this field shall be 0.

                          Table I.15 – Format of the contents of the Component Mapping box

                             Field name                      Size (bits)                       Value
                                CMPi                             16                          0 to 16 384
                               MTYPi                             8                             0 to 1
                               PCOLi                             8                            0 to 255




                                                                                        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)                  153
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

I.5.3.6        Channel Definition box
The Channel Definition box specifies the meaning of the samples in each channel in the image. The exact location of this
box within the JP2 Header box may vary provided that it follows the Image Header box.The mapping between actual
components from the codestream to channels is specified in the Component Mapping box. If the JP2 Header box does not
contain a Component Mapping box, then a reader shall map component i to channel i, for all components in the
codestream.
There shall be at most one Channel Definition box inside a JP2 Header box.
This box contains an array of channel descriptions. For each description, three values are specified: the index of the
channel described by that association, the type of that channel, and the association of that channel with particular colours.
This box may specify multiple descriptions for a single channel.
If a multiple component transform is specified within the codestream, the image must be in an RGB colourspace and the
red, green and blue colours as channels 0, 1 and 2 in the codestream, respectively.
The type of the Channel Definition box shall be 'cdef' (0x6364 6566). The contents of this box shall be as in Figure I.13:


                                         N        Cn0      Typ0     Asoc0         CnN – 1 TypN – 1 AsocN – 1

                                                                                                     T.800_FI-13


                               Figure I.13 – Organization of the contents of a Channel Definition box
               N:          Number of channel descriptions. This field specifies the number of channel descriptions in this box.
                           This field is encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
               Cni:        Channel index. This field specifies the index of the channel for this description. The value of this field
                           represents the index of the channel as defined within the Component Mapping box (or the actual
                           component from the codestream if the file does not contain a Component Mapping box). This field is
                           encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
               Typi:       Channel type. This field specifies the type of the channel for this description. The value of this field
                           specifies the meaning of the decompressed samples in this channel. This field is encoded as a 2-byte
                           big-endian unsigned integer. Legal values of this field are shown in Table I.16:

                                                        Table I.16 – Typi field values

      Value                                                                  Meaning
        0              This channel is the colour image data for the associated colour.
        1              Opacity. A sample value of 0 indicates that the sample is 100% transparent, and the maximum value of the
                       channel (related to the bit depth of the codestream component or the related palette component mapped to this
                       channel) indicates a 100% opaque sample. All opacity channels shall be mapped from unsigned components.
        2              Premultiplied opacity. An opacity channel as specified above, except that the value of the opacity channel has
                       been multiplied into the colour channels for which this channel is associated. Premultiplication is defined as
                       follows:
                                                                                     
                                                                         Sp  S                                                      (I-5)
                                                                                    max
                       where S is the original sample, Sp is the pre multiplied sample (the sample stored in the image,  is the value of the
                       opacity channel, and max is the maximum value of the opacity channel as defined by the bit depth of the opacity
                       channel.
 3 to (216– 2)         Reserved for ITU-T | ISO use
      216– 1           The type of this channel is not specified.
               Asoci:      Channel association. This field specifies the index of the colour for which this channel is directly
                           associated (or a special value to indicate the whole image or the lack of an association). For example,
                           if this channel is an opacity channel for the red channel in an RGB colourspace, this field would
                           specify the index of the colour red. Table I.17 specifies legal association values. Table I.18 specifies
                           legal colour indices. This field is encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.




154             Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                          ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                                                     Table I.17 – Asoci field values

         Value                                                               Meaning
           0               This channel is associated as the image as a whole (for example, an independent opacity channel that
                           should be applied to all colour channels).
      1 to (216– 2)        This channel is associated with a particular colour as indicated by this value. This value is used to
                           associate a particular channel with a particular aspect of the specification of the colourspace of this
                           image. For example, indicating that a channel is associated with the red channel of an RGB image allows
                           the reader to associate that decoded channel with the Red input to an ICC profile contained within a
                           Colour Specification box. Colour indicators are specified in Table I.18.
         216– 1            This channel is not associated with any particular colour.


                                       Table I.18 – Colours indicated by the Asoci field

                         Class of              Colour indicated by the following value of the Asoci field
                       colourspace
                                                 1                  2                   3                  4
                           RGB                  R                   G                   B
                         Greyscale              Y
                          YCbCr                 Y                  Cb                   Cr
                      The following colourspace classes are listed for future reference, as well as to aid the
                      understanding of the use of the Asoci field:
                           XYZ                  X                   Y                   Z
                            Lab                 L                   a                   b
                            Luv                 L                   u                   v
                          YCbCr                 Y                  Cb                   Cr
                           Yxy                  Y                   x                   y
                           HSV                  H                   S                   V
                           HLS                  H                   L                   S
                          CMYK                  C                   M                   Y                  K
                           CMY                  C                   M                   Y
                            Jab                  J                  a                   b
                         n colour
                                                 1                  2                   3                  4
                       colourspaces

The values in Table I.18 specify indices that have been assigned to represent specific "colours" and do not refer to specific
channels (or components within the codestream or palette). Readers must use the information contained within the
Channel Definition box to determine which channels contain which colours.
In this box, channel indices are mapped from particular components within the codestream or palette. Colour indices
specify how a particular channel shall be interpreted based on the specification of the colourspace of the image. There
shall be one channel definition in this box for every colour required by the colourspace specification of this file as specified
by the Colourspace Specification box.
For example, the green colour in an RGB image is specified by a {Cn, Typ, Asoc} value of {i, 0, 2}, where i is the index
of that channel (either directly or as generated by applying the reverse multiple component transform to the actual
components in the codestream). Applications that are only concerned with extracting the colour channels can treat the
Typ/Asoc field pair as a four-byte value where the combined value maps directly to the colour indices (as the Typ field
for a colour channel shall be 0).
In another example, the codestream may contain a channel i that specifies opacity blending samples for the red and green
channels, and a channel j that specifies opacity blending samples for the blue channel. In that file, the following
{Cn, Typ, Asoc} tuples would be found in the Channel Definition box for the two opacity channels: {i, 1, 1}, {i, 1, 2}
and {j, 1, 3}.
There shall not be more than one channel in a JP2 file with a the same Typ i and Asoci value pair, with the exception of
Typi and Asoci values of 216– 1 (not specified). For example a JP2 file in an RGB colourspace shall only contain one green
channel, and a greyscale image shall contain only one grey channel. There shall be either exactly one opacity channel,
exactly one pre-multiplied opacity channel, or neither associated with a single colour channel in an image.




                                                                                             Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)           155
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

If the codestream contains only colour channels and those channels are ordered in the same order as the associated colours
(for example, an RGB image with three channels in the order R, G, then B), then this box shall not exist. If there are any
auxiliary channels or the channels are not in the same order as the colour indices, then the Channel Definition box
(see Table I.19) shall be found within the JP2 Header box with a complete list of channel definitions.

                                        Table I.19 – Format of the Channel Definition box

                              Parameter                        Size (bits)                        Value
                                   N                               16                          1 to (216– 1)
                                  Cni                              16                          0 to (216– 1)
                                 Typi                              16                          0 to (216– 1)
                                 Asoci                             16                          0 to (216– 1)

I.5.3.7     Resolution box (superbox)
This box specifies the capture and default display grid resolutions of this image. If this box exists, it shall contain either
a Capture Resolution box, or a Default Display Resolution box, or both.
There shall be at most one Resolution box inside a JP2 Header box.
The type of a Resolution box shall be 'res\040' (0x7265 7320). The contents of the Resolution box are as in Figure I.14:




                             Figure I.14 – Organization of the contents of the Resolution box
            resc:    Capture Resolution box. This box specifies the grid resolution at which this image was captured. The
                     format of this box is specified in I.5.3.7.1.
            resd:    Default Display Resolution box. This box specifies the default grid resolution at which this image
                     should be displayed. The format of this box is specified in I.5.3.7.2

I.5.3.7.1    Capture Resolution box
If this box exists, it shall specify the grid resolution of the source from which the image samples represented by the
codestream were captured or created. The dimensions of the reference grid are given by the contents of the Image Header
box, see I.5.3.1.
The contents of the Capture Resolution box shall be consistently adjusted between edits such that the resolution as given
by this box always reflects the physical separation between reference grid points on the image region encoded or
represented by the file.
If the Codestream box does not represent a physical image, this box might not exist, or might represent a physical
dimension intended by the creator of the image.
   NOTE – For example, this box could specify the resolution of the flatbed scanner that captured a page from a book. The capture
   grid resolution could also specify the resolution of an aerial digital camera or satellite camera. It may also specify the resolution at
   which the image in the file was rendered from a vector original or from a raster original in a resampling operation. If a new JPEG
   2000 file is created by cropping from an original file, the contents of the Capture Resolution box will not change as the resolution
   of the sample grid does not change, i.e., both the sample grid size and the size of the image described by it shrink by the same
   amount. If, however, an image is transcoded to a lower resolution, for example by dropping finer resolution levels, any
   accompanying change in the dimensions of the image on the reference grid and associated changes in the Image Header box will
   need to be reflected to the contents of the Capture Resolution box by dividing the resolution in both the horizontal and vertical
   directions by an appropriate factor. Note further that image pixels may not be square, i.e., horizontal and vertical grid resolutions
   may differ, and that not each position of the reference grid may carry an image sample due to the subsampling factors recorded in
   the SIZ marker. The pixel dimensions are up to the image capturing process, any editing of the file will be reflected by an
   appropriate change of the Capture Resolution box to ensure that these dimensions remain unchanged.

The vertical and horizontal capture grid resolutions are calculated using the six parameters (Table I.20) stored in this box
in the following two equations, respectively:

                                                                VRcN
                                                        VRc          10VRcE                                                        (I-4)
                                                                VRcD




156          Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                       ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                                                              HRcN
                                                      HRc          10 HRcE                                                    (I-5)
                                                              HRcD

The values VRc and HRc are always in reference grid points per metre. If an application requires the grid resolution in
another unit, then that application must apply the appropriate conversion.
The type of a Capture Resolution box shall be 'resc' (0x7265 7363). The contents of the Capture Resolution box are as in
Figure I.15:




                       Figure I.15 – Organization of the contents of the Capture Resolution box
            VRcN:    Vertical Capture grid resolution numerator. This parameter specifies the VRcN value in
                     Equation (I-4), which is used to calculate the vertical capture grid resolution. This parameter is
                     encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
            VRcD:    Vertical Capture grid resolution denominator. This parameter specifies the VRcD value in
                     Equation (I-4), which is used to calculate the vertical capture grid resolution. This parameter is
                     encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
            HRcN:    Horizontal Capture grid resolution numerator. This parameter specifies the HRcN value in
                     Equation (I-5), which is used to calculate the horizontal capture grid resolution. This parameter is
                     encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
            HRcD:    Horizontal Capture grid resolution denominator. This parameter specifies the HRcD value in Equation
                     (I-5), which is used to calculate the horizontal capture grid resolution. This parameter is encoded as a
                     2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
            VRcE:    Vertical Capture grid resolution exponent. This parameter specifies the VRcE value in Equation (I-4),
                     which is used to calculate the vertical capture grid resolution. This parameter is encoded as a
                     twos-complement 1-byte signed integer.
            HRcE:    Horizontal Capture grid resolution exponent. This parameter specifies the HRcE value in
                     Equation (I-5), which is used to calculate the horizontal capture grid resolution. This parameter is
                     encoded as a twos-complement 1-byte signed integer.

                           Table I.20 – Format of the contents of the Capture Resolution box

                            Field name                       Size (bits)                       Value
                               VRcN                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                               VRcD                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                               HRcN                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                               HRcD                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                               VRcE                              8                          –128 to 127
                               HRcE                              8                          –128 to 127

I.5.3.7.2   Default Display Resolution box
If present, this box specifies a desired display grid resolution defining the intended reproduction of the file contents. The
desired size of the reproduced physical image is then obtained by dividing the dimensions of the pixel grid, as given by
the Image Header box (see I.5.3.1) by the horizontal and vertical resolutions as given by this box.
This box represents a default or recommended value, and applications may determine appropriate sizes for image
reproduction by other means.
   NOTE – This box may be used to determine the size of the image on a page when the image is placed in a page-layout program,
   and page layout programs may adjust the contents of this box to reflect edits performed by its users: e.g., to resize an image on a
   page as intended for printing or displaying on a monitor. In general, it is recommended that the pixel aspect ratio of the Capture
   Resolution box and the Display Resolution box should be the same. The following example may clarify the semantics of the Default
   Display Resolution box and the Capture Resolution box further: Consider an editing process that reduces the number of samples
   of the original image to one fourth by dropping every other horizontal and vertical pixel. One method of implementing this process
   would be to drop the highest resolution level and to double the horizontal and vertical subsampling factors in the CSIZ marker.
   Under this transformation, the dimension of the image reference grid remains unchanged, though only one fourth of the image


                                                                                         Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)              157
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

   samples remains in the image. Thus, the Capture Resolution box will remain unchanged. If it is desired to reproduce the image in
   half the size in each direction when displayed on a screen or printed, the Default Display Resolution box should however, be
   adjusted by multiplying the number of reference grid points per metre by two. Another method to implement this reduction in
   sample points might be to drop the finest resolution level and divide the dimensions of the reference grid, the canvas offsets, the
   tile offsets and the tile dimensions by two. Under this transformation, the dimensions of the reference grid change, and the spacing
   between two grid points is doubled. Thus, the number of grid points per metre in the Capture Resolution box would be divided by
   two. If it is desirable to reproduce the image then in one fourth its original size, the Display Resolution box would not require any
   change as the reference grid would contain only one fourth of the samples while the distance between each sample would remain
   unchanged, thus reproducing the image on a smaller scale. Note further that applications that do not honour the Default Display
   Resolution box would reproduce the image to one fourth of the number of image pixels of the original image for either editing
   process by implementing the procedure of computing the number of image pixels from the number of reference grid points defined
   in I.5.3.1.1.

The vertical and horizontal display grid resolutions are calculated using the six parameters (Table I.21) stored in this box
in the following two equations, respectively:

                                                              VRdN
                                                     VRd           10VRdE                                                       (I-6)
                                                              VRdD

                                                              HRdN
                                                    HRd            10HRdE                                                       (I-7)
                                                              HRdD

The values VRd and HRd are always in reference grid points per metre. If an application requires the grid resolution in
another unit, then that application must apply the appropriate conversion.
The type of a Default Display Resolution box shall be 'resd' (0x7265 7364). The contents of the Default Display
Resolution box are as in Figure I.16:




                   Figure I.16 – Organization of the contents of the Default Display Resolution box
          VRdN: Vertical Display grid resolution numerator. This parameter specifies the VRdN value in
                Equation (I-6), which is used to calculate the vertical display grid resolution. This parameter is
                encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
          VRdD: Vertical Display grid resolution denominator. This parameter specifies the VRdD value in
                Equation (I-6), which is used to calculate the vertical display grid resolution. This parameter is
                encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
          HRdN: Horizontal Display grid resolution numerator. This parameter specifies the HRdN value in
                Equation (I-7), which is used to calculate the horizontal display grid resolution. This parameter is
                encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
          HRdD: Horizontal Display grid resolution denominator. This parameter specifies the HRdD value in
                Equation (I-7), which is used to calculate the horizontal display grid resolution. This parameter is
                encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
          VRdE:      Vertical Display grid resolution exponent. This parameter specifies the VRdE value in Equation (I-6),
                     which is used to calculate the vertical display grid resolution. This parameter is encoded as a twos-
                     complement 1-byte signed integer.
          HRdE: Horizontal Display grid resolution exponent. This parameter specifies the HRdE value in
                Equation (I-7), which is used to calculate the horizontal display grid resolution. This parameter is
                encoded as a twos-complement 1-byte signed integer.




158        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                     Table I.21 – Format of the contents of the Default Display Resolution box

                        Field name                       Size (bits)                       Value
                           VRdN                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                           VRdD                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                           HRdN                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                           HRdD                              16                         1 to (216– 1)
                           VRdE                              8                          –128 to 127
                           HRdE                              8                          –128 to 127

I.5.4     Contiguous Codestream box
The Contiguous Codestream box contains a valid and complete JPEG 2000 codestream, as defined in Annex A. When
displaying the image, a conforming reader shall ignore all codestreams after the first codestream found in the file.
Contiguous Codestream boxes may be found anywhere in the file except before the JP2 Header box.
The type of a Contiguous Codestream box shall be 'jp2c' (0x6A70 3263). The contents of the box shall be as in Figure I.17:




                   Figure I.17 – Organization of the contents of the Contiguous Codestream box
          Code:     This field contains a valid and complete JPEG 2000 codestream as specified by Annex A.

                       Table I.22 – Format of the contents of the Contiguous Codestream box

                           Field name                    Size (bits)                    Value
                              Code                        Variable                     Variable


I.6       Adding intellectual property rights information in JP2
This Recommendation | International Standard specifies a box type for a box which is devoted to carrying intellectual
property rights information within a JP2 file. Inclusion of this information in a JP2 file is optional for conforming files.
The definition of the format of the contents of this box is reserved for ITU-T | ISO. However, the type of this box is
defined in this Recommendation | International Standard as a means to allow applications to recognize the existence of
IPR information. Use and interpretation of this information is beyond the scope of this Recommendation | International
Standard.
In general, an IPR box found at the top level of the file specifies IPR for the file as a whole. IPR boxes may be found at
other locations, including inside superboxes defined by other Recommendations | International Standards. For those IPR
boxes, the rights specified refer to the entity defined by the containing superbox.
The type of the Intellectual Property box shall be 'jp2i' (0x6A70 3269).

I.7       Adding vendor-specific information to the JP2 file format
The following boxes provide a set of tools by which applications can add vendor-specific information to the JP2 file
format. All of the following boxes are optional in conforming files and may be ignored by conforming readers.

I.7.1     XML boxes
An XML box contains vendor-specific information (in XML format) other than the information contained within boxes
defined by this Recommendation | International Standard. There may be multiple XML boxes within the file, and those
boxes may be found anywhere in the file except before the File Type box.




                                                                                  Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)            159
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

The type of an XML box is 'xml\040' (0x786D 6C20). The contents of the box shall be as in Figure I.18:




                             Figure I.18 – Organization of the contents of the XML box
          DATA: This field shall contain a well-formed XML document as defined by REC-xml-19980210.
The existence of any XML boxes is optional for conforming files. Also, any XML box shall not contain any information
necessary for decoding the image to the extent that is defined within this Recommendation | International Standard, and
the correct interpretation of the contents of any XML box shall not change the visual appearance of the image. All readers
may ignore any XML box in the file.

I.7.2     UUID boxes
A UUID box contains vendor-specific information other than the information contained within boxes defined within this
Recommendation | International Standard. There may be multiple UUID boxes within the file, and those boxes may be
found anywhere in the file except before the File Type box.
The type of a UUID box shall be 'uuid' (0x7575 6964). The contents of the box shall be as in Figure I.19:


                                                   ID                                       DATA
                                                                                                    T.800_FI-19


                             Figure I.19 – Organization of the contents of the UUID box
          ID:       This field contains a 16-byte UUID as specified by ISO/IEC 11578. The value of this UUID specifies
                    the format of the vendor-specific information stored in the DATA field and the interpretation of that
                    information.
          DATA: This field contains vendor-specific information. The format of this information is defined outside of
                the scope of this Recommendation | International Standard, but it is indicated by the value of the
                UUID field.

                                  Table I.23 – Format of the contents of a UUID box

                           Field name                    Size (bits)                    Value
                             UUID                           128                        Variable
                             DATA                         Variable                     Variable

The existence of any UUID boxes is optional for conforming files. Also, any UUID box shall not contain any information
necessary for decoding the image to the extent that is defined within this part of this Recommendation | International
Standard, and the interpretation of the information in any UUID box shall not change the visual appearance of the image.
All readers may ignore any UUID box.

I.7.3     UUID Info boxes (superbox)
While it is useful to allow vendors to extend JP2 files by adding information using UUID boxes, it is also useful to provide
information in a standard form which can be used by non-extended applications to get more information about the
extensions in the file. This information is contained in UUID Info boxes. A JP2 file may contain zero or more UUID Info
boxes. These boxes may be found anywhere in the top level of the file (the superbox of a UUID Info box shall be the JP2
file itself) except before the File Type box.
These boxes, if present, may not provide a complete index for the UUIDs in the file, may reference UUIDs not used in
the file, and possibly may provide multiple references for the same UUID.




160        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                                ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

The type of a UUID Info box shall be 'uinf' (0x7569 6E66). The contents of a UUID Info box are as in Figure I.20:




                            Figure I.20 – Organization of the contents of a UUID Info box
          UList:    UUID List box. This box contains a list of UUIDs for which this UUID Info box specifies a link to
                    more information. The format of the UUID List box is specified in I.7.3.1.
          DE:       Data Entry URL box. This box contains a URL. An application can acquire more information about
                    the UUIDs contained in the UUID List box. The format of a Data Entry URL box is specified
                    in I.7.3.2.

I.7.3.1   UUID List box
This box contains a list of UUIDs. The type of a UUID List box shall be ‘ulst’ (0x756C 7374). The contents of a UUID
List box shall be as in Figure I.21:



  NU                             ID0                                                       IDNU – 1
                                                                                                                   T.800_FI-21


                            Figure I.21 – Organization of the contents of a UUID List box
          NU:       Number of UUIDs. This field specifies the number of UUIDs found in this UUID List box. This field
                    is encoded as a 2-byte big-endian unsigned integer.
          IDi:      ID. This field specifies one UUID, as specified in ISO/IEC 11578, which shall be associated with the
                    URL contained in the URL box within the same UUID Info box. The number of UUID i fields shall
                    be the same as the value of the NU field. The value of this field shall be a 16-byte UUID.

                              Table I.24 – UUID List box contents data structure values

                           Parameter                     Size (bits)                    Value
                               NU                            16                      0 to (216– 1)
                             UUIDi                          128                      0 to (2128– 1)

I.7.3.2   Data Entry URL box
This box contains a URL which can be used by an application to acquire more information about the associated
vendor-specific extensions. The format of the information acquired through the use of this URL is not defined in this
Recommendation | International Standard. The URL type should be of a service which delivers a file (e.g., URLs of type
file, http, ftp, etc.), which ideally also permits random access. Relative URLs are permissible and are relative to the file
containing this Data Entry URL box.
The type of a Data Entry URL box shall be 'url\040' (0x7572 6C20). The contents of a Data Entry URL box shall be as in
Figure I.22:




                        Figure I.22 – Organization of the contents of a Data Entry URL box
          VERS:     Version number. This field specifies the version number of the format of this box and is encoded as
                    a 1-byte unsigned integer. The value of this field shall be 0.
          FLAG: Flags. This field is reserved for other uses to flag particular attributes of this box and is encoded as a
                3-byte unsigned integer. The value of this field shall be 0.
          LOC:      Location. This field specifies the URL of the additional information associated with the UUIDs
                    contained in the UUID List box within the same UUID Info superbox. The URL is encoded as a null
                    terminated string of UTF-8 characters.



                                                                                  Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)             161
ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

                         Table I.25 – Data Entry URL box contents data structure values

                          Parameter                  Size (bits)                   Value
                            VERS                         8                           0
                            FLAG                         24                          0
                            LOC                        varies                      varies


I.8      Dealing with unknown boxes
A conforming JP2 file may contain boxes not known to applications based solely on this Recommendation | International
Standard. If a conforming reader finds a box that it does not understand, it shall skip and ignore that box.




162        Rec. ITU-T T.800 (11/2015)
                                                                                            ISO/IEC 15444-1:2016 (E)

